Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07051-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Multi-echelon location routing problem with vehicle-drone
delivery and transshipment for cold chain transportation
Yanfeng Li1
· Jie Zhang2
Received: 2 April 2025 / Accepted: 9 January 2026
©TheAuthor(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2026
Abstract
Toaddressthechallengesofcoldchaindistributionforperishablegoodsduringdisruptionsor
emergency situations such as infectious diseases and global epidemic, this paper investigates
an integrated optimization problem called the multi-echelon location routing problem with
vehicle-dronedelivery(ME-LRP-VD).Specifically,itisdefinedasanoveltransportationsys
tem integrating two types of facility location, multi-echelon path planning, and collaborative
operation between vehicles and drones. This mode facilitates the consolidation and trans
shipment of fresh goods via the distribution transshipment station (DTS) in the first-echelon
transportation. While in the second-echelon distribution, this mode provides pickup services
for normal residents and permits the launch and landing of drones to serve quarantined resi
dents via the contactless delivery site (CDS). Given this, we explicitly model various types of
economic costs, travel time of heterogeneous vehicles and drones, the risk of virus transmis
sion, and quality decay of fresh products, develop a mixed-integer programming model with
multi-objective optimization. Furthermore, we propose a hybrid multi-objective metaheuris
tic approach based on decomposition techniques in which a bi-level clustering algorithm
with the spatio-temporal feature is designed to obtain the location strategies of distribution
transshipment sites and contactless delivery sites, followed by a cooperative multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm with the local search rule is applied to explore the Pareto solution
for multi-echelonvehicle-droneroutes.Finally,extensivecomputationalexperimentsdemon
strate theeffectivenessofourproposedalgorithmineachsolutionundervariousscaleproblem
instances. A real-world implementation case in Chongqing, China, further validates the oper
ational feasibility of ME-LRP-VD system. The sensitivity analysis is conducted to analyze
key parameters and further provides some management implications regarding perishable
product distribution in case of some disruptions or emergency situation.
Keywords Multi-echelon · Location routing problem · Vehicle-drone routes · Cold chain ·
Multi-objective metaheuristic algorithm
B JieZhang
jiezhang_5@163.com
1
2
School of Economics and Management, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China
School of Traffic and Transportation, Chongqing Jiaotong University, Chongqing 400074, China
123
Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
With the outbreak of infectious diseases, the urban logistics distribution of fresh food is
facing extremely severe challenges. Driven by some disruptions or emergency situation such
as the infectious diseases and global epidemic, “all people are desperately scrambling food
online” has led to a surge in demand for cold chain transportation of refrigerated food,
vegetables, fruits, and frozen products (Cnr.cn, 2020). Direct vehicle delivery into residential
communities involves direct contact between personnel and vehicles, potentially increasing
the risk of infection for delivery personnel, vehicles, and residents in other areas, so that
vehicles and personnel of take-out and delivery services are prohibited from entering the
residential area (Jiang et al., 2023; Mei, 2022). When traffic restrictions are implemented on
certain roads, they may affect the normal travel of vehicles. Many communities have even
taken intervention measures to isolate some infected residents at home. Therefore, relying
solely on vehicle delivery cannot effectively provide high-quality cold chain services to some
isolated residents and gated residential community.
Drone technology, as an innovative tool for transportation and distribution, is continually
evolving and growing in its application in last-mile delivery (Kim et al., 2021; Wang, 2025).
In many cases, drones are generally performed in collaboration with vehicles to finish their
work (Carlsson & Song, 2018; Chung et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2024). In the event of an
infectious disease or an epidemic, logistics companies should adopt “contactless” delivery
technology to alleviate the shortage of delivery personnel and the risk of cross-infection
during the epidemic (Chen, 2020). Especially when the warehouse is located in the suburbs
and the epidemic areas are scattered in urban areas, high distribution costs will be incurred
if refrigerated vehicles still travel directly from the warehouse to various epidemic areas.
When faced with this scenario, the multi-echelon distribution system with transshipment is
frequently usedbylogistics companiestotransportanddistribute variouscommodities(Cuda
et al., 2015;Yuetal.,2011).
Given this background, it is necessary to introduce a new delivery method, namely trans
shipment via refrigerated transport vehicles and contactless delivery via drones. Govindan
et al. (2014) consider that continuously improving the multi-echelon integrated system can
facilitate the efficient completion of cold chain distribution. This model consolidates and
transships goods through the distribution transshipment stations. Two types of vehicles and
drones are used during first-echelon transportation and second-echelon distribution, respec
tively. The scenario studied in this paper is a multi-echelon distribution model in which the
warehouse is in the suburbs, and the distribution transshipment station (DTS) and contactless
delivery site (CDS) are in urban areas. Chen et al. (2019) and Acevedo-Chedid et al., (2023)
believe that location allocation problem is regarded as the foundation for solving the vehicle
routing problem, and rational site selection strategies can help reduce overall logistics and
distribution costs. Therefore, how to determine the locations of DTS and CDS sites in the
network and combining them with subsequent route planning is crucial.
We believe that this paper is the first to consider both two types of facility location and
multi-echelon routing planning in a multi-echelon vehicle-drone mode while simultaneously
considering the transshipment management, the risk of virus transmission, and quality decay
of fresh products in an epidemic situation. The problem is definedas amulti-echelon location
routing optimization problem with vehicle-drone delivery (ME-LRP-VD) for fresh products,
which is an extension to the vehicle routing problem with drones and location allocation
problem while taking low economic cost and high delivery efficiency as the objective.
123
Annals of Operations Research
Compared with the traditional concept of the multi-echelon vehicle routing problem
(Tadaros et al., 2024) and the multi-echelon location problem (Rohaninejad et al., 2018),
the ME-LRP-VDconceptindicates a type of facility for parcel transshipment and consolida
tion as wellasanothertypeoftemporaryinfrastructureforvehicle-dronecontactlessdelivery.
ME-LRP-VD is a comprehensive problem related to several issues, including the location
problem of two types of site nodes (i.e., distribution transshipment stations and “contactless”
delivery sites), the route optimization problem of three types of delivery routes (i.e., the driv
ing route of transportation vehicles, the driving route of distribution vehicles, and the flight
route of drones). Thefirstechelonoftransportation is that refrigerated transportation vehicles
transport fresh products from the warehouse to transshipment stations. The second echelon
of distribution uses refrigerated distribution vehicles and drones to complete “contactless”
distribution from the transshipment station to the epidemic area. We use different types of
vehicles for multi-echelon distribution scenarios. Combined with some emerging concepts,
such as drones, smart express cabinets, etc., it can not only effectively solve the problem of
urban traffic restrictions, but also further optimize terminal distribution.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, the related work and literature are reviewed,
wheretheuniquefeaturesofthisproblemarehighlighted.Section3presentsaformalproblem
descriptionandmodelsitasabi-objectivemathematicalformulation.Thedetailsofthehybrid
multi-objective metaheuristic algorithm are introduced in Sect. 4. Section 5 gives the results
and analysis related to the experiments. Some conclusions of the study and an outlook on
possible future research are presented in Sect. 6.
2 Literature review
In this section, we successively summarize some literature about the specific problems of the
entire problem setting. We focus on four main fields of literature and analyze the gap in the
previous literature that is filled by this work at hand.
2.1 Freshproductdeliveryproblem
Most related research on fresh product distribution mainly focuses on the vehicle routing
optimization problem of fresh food and perishable products. Some general characteris
tics considered in model construction focused on time window limits, temperature control,
and product perishability (Alvarez et al., 2020; Cai & Zhou, 2014;Chenet al., 2018;
Neves-Moreira et al., 2019). Osvald and Stirn (2008) proposed a fresh product distribu
tion optimization model based on time window constraints and product freshness. Keizer
et al. (2017) believed that the quality of fresh agricultural products in the network design
model is affected by logistics time, heterogeneity of the commodity itself, and distribution
temperature. Ahmadi-Javid et al. (2023) constructed a mixed integer linear programming
model to minimize the sum of the energy cost of the warehouse and the transportation cost
of delivering customer needs. In addition, some studies typically consider quality decay and
time-related value loss in cold chain transportation as well (Albrecht & Steinrücke, 2018;
Chan et al., 2020;Dengetal.,2023). For example, Liang et al. (2020) combined the factors
of temperature and humidity, and collaboratively optimized vehicle routes as well as distri
bution environmental conditions to reduce the quality loss of perishable products. Deng et al.
123
Annals of Operations Research
(2023) studied the problem of pick-up and delivery with time windows in cold chain trans
portation. By quantifying the impact of time on the quality of multiple perishable products,
they constructed a set partitioning model with incompatibility constraints.
2.2 Location-routing problemoffreshproducts
To the best of our knowledge, incorporating the impact of location problems when planning
vehicleroutescaneffectivelyreducetheoveralllogisticsdistributioncost(Drexl&Schneider,
2015). The location routing problem of fresh products (LRP-FP) has received great interest
from practitioners and scholars in recent years (Devapriya et al., 2017; Hashemi-Amiri et al.,
2023;Rahmanifaretal.,2024;Zhouetal.,2023).Forinstance,Golestani etal. (2021)studied
a bi-objective green LRP-FP for collaborative distribution of multiple types of perishable
products at different storage temperatures. Acevedo-Chedid et al., (2023) considered time
windows,optimalterminalcenterlocations, andheterogeneousfleetswithlimitedcapacityto
study LRP-FP. They established a mixed integer nonlinear optimization model to minimize
logistics costs and environmental impacts.
Somescholars have also gradually paid attention to the problem of multi-echelon location
routing optimization of fresh food (Chen et al., 2024;Govindanetal.,2014; Lan et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2021). Govindan et al. (2014) studied a two-echelon location-routing problem
with time windows based on the supply chain network of perishable food. Bala et al. (2017)
integrated the characteristics of production planning, facility location selection, and route
optimization to study a two-echelon LRP-FP. A metaheuristic algorithm was designed based
on a pre-flow propulsion algorithm and simulated annealing to solve the problem. Liu et al.
(2021) combined the new perspective of economic cost, freshness, and carbon emission
factors, and proposed a multi-objective optimization model for perishable products. The
integrated model can significantly improve the efficiency of supply chain management for
perishable goods from a global optimization perspective. However, under the influence of the
epidemic of infectious diseases, there are few studies on the optimization of multi-echelon
location routing distribution in cold chain transportation for fresh products.
2.3 Vehicle-drone routing problem
Given the particularity of the epidemic background, traditional vehicle distribution meth
ods may be restricted in the closed environment of the epidemic area. Cold chain logistics
companies should adopt “contactless” distribution technology completed by vehicle-drone
collaboration. Macrina et al. (2020) proposed that the vehicle routing problem with drones
(VRPD) covers two main situations. One category is composed of multiple trucks and mul
tiple drones, and each node is visited by vehicles or drones. The other scenario is composed
of one or more trucks and one or more drones, and each node is only visited by drones. Mur
ray and Chu (2015) proposed the traveling salesman problem in the context of collaborative
delivery by trucks and drones. To reduce the risk of virus transmission and total distribu
tion costs, it is necessary to consider how to effectively utilize the collaborative delivery
characteristics of vehicles and drones to reasonably allocate delivery tasks. Current research
on vehicle-drone collaborative delivery mainly focuses on differentiated treatment from the
selection of launch and landing locations of drones, the number of drones that vehicles can
carry, and the joint operation methods of vehicles and drones, etc. (Chang and Lee, 2018;
Boysen et al., 2018;Ham,2018; Dell’Amico et al., 2020; Dukkanci et al., 2024).
123
Annals of Operations Research
Carlsson and Song (2018) considered that vehicles and drones can meet at any location.
KarakandAbdelghany(2019)regardedvehiclesascarriersofdrones,andalldeliveryservices
werecompletedonlybydrones.Chauhanetal.(2019)combineddrones’energyconsumption
andflightdistanceconstraintstoproposeamaximumcoveragefacilitylocationproblem.Kim
et al. (2019) studied the uncertainty of drone operating conditions and proposed a stochastic
modeling framework to determine the location and transport capacity of drone facilities
to effectively respond to disasters. Moshref-Javadi et al. (2020) took into account the load
capacity and flight time limitations to improve the efficiency of the delivery system and
reduce the total waiting time for customers. Faiz et al. (2024) proposed a two-echelon routing
problem, where trucks performed the first-echelon transportation and drones performed the
second-echelon transportation. When trucks could not reach the trapped people directly, they
transported drones from warehouses to some intermediate satellite locations to complete
the rescue mission. Meng et al. (2024) proposed a truck-drone routing problem with time
windows, in which each truck is equipped with a drone, to provide pickup and delivery
services to a group of customers at the lowest cost.
2.4 Multi-objective optimization
Research in related fields considers multi-objective optimization problem (MOP) focusing
on considerations of total distribution cost, customer satisfaction, product freshness, num
ber of vehicles used, customer waiting time, vehicle travel distance, carbon emissions, etc.
(Bortolini et al., 2016;Lengetal.,2020; Liang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2021; Mahapatra
et al., 2020;Mogaleetal.,2020). To solve the multi-echelon LRP-FP, Govindan et al. (2014)
applied Multi-objective Particle Swarm optimization and Adaptive Multi-objective Variable
Neighborhood Search algorithms to find the optimal distribution solution. Martínez-Salazar
et al. (2014) proposed a bi-objective minimization of economic cost and workload balancing
model for the driver. Scattered Point Tabu Search and Non-dominant Sorting Genetic Algo
rithm II (NSGA-II) were utilized to solve the model. Esmizadeh et al. (2021) proposed a
multi-objective mixed-integer linear programming to model a cold chain with complemen
tary operations on a hierarchical hub network and applied a genetic algorithm in large-sized
networks. Hosseini et al. (2023) proposed a blood supply chain network design problem to
minimize the total cost, transportation time, and unsatisfied demand as well as maximize
the total reliability, and they applied the intelligent NSGA-II algorithm to solve this prob
lem. Acevedo-Chedid et al., (2023) applied various solution strategies to solve the LRP-FP,
including experimental tests with Pareto optimization” and “weighted sum” methods. Wu
and Dong (2023) proposed an ecological economic routing optimization problem for the
distribution of perishable goods. A mixed integer scale model for bi-objective optimization
of vehicle fuel consumption and perishables decay value was constructed, and the Gurobi
solver was applied to solve the model through weighted normalization.
2.5 Multi-objective optimization
Table 1 summarizes the research in the aforementioned directions and briefly outlines the
problem characteristics identified in the literature discussed earlier. However, we found that
the aforementioned studies have certain limitations: (i) The related literature review revealed
thatresearchonthelocationallocationandroutingplanningattractedlessattention,especially
on vehicle-drone scheduling and distribution transshipment of network sites belonging to
different echelons.(ii)Althoughmethodsevenexistforthedistributionplanningofperishable
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
Table1Overviewofproblemcharacteristicsusedinrelevantliterature
Problem
type
References Problemfeatures Objective Size Approach
LRP Govindanetal.
(2014)
Two-echelonandtime
windows
Costandenvi
ronmental
impact
60 Heuristic
LRP Liuetal.(2021) Location-inventory-routing
integration
Cost,carbon
emission,and
freshness
31 Heuristic
LRP Golestanietal.
(2021)
Multi-typeproducts Costand
quality
25 Exact
LRP Acevedo-Chedid
etal.,(2023)
Cross-dockingand
heterogeneousfleets
Costandenvi
ronmental
impact
8 Exact
LRP Chenetal.(2024) Pickupanddelivery Cost 111 Heuristic
VRPD MurrayandChu
(2015)
1-Vehicle,1-Drone Time 20 Heuristic
VRPD Carlssonand
Song(2018)
1-Vehicle,1-Drone Time 100 Heuristic
VRPD Ham(2018) m-Vehicle,n-Drone Time 100 Heuristic
VRPD Moshref-Javadi
etal.(2020)
1-Vehicle,m-Drone Time 159 Heuristic
VRPD Robertiand
Ruthmair
(2021)
1-Vehicle,1-Drone Time 39 Exact
VRPD Mengetal.
(2024)
1-Vehicle,1-Drone Cost 50 Heuristic
MOP Lengetal.(2020) Multipletypesofcargo Costand
qualityof
decay
60 Heuristic
MOP Esmizadehetal.
(2021)
Threelevelsoffreshness
timewindows
Cost,time,and
satisfaction
18 Heuristic
MOP Liangetal.
(2023)
Multi-period Costand
customer
satisfaction
100 Heuristic
MOP WuandDong
(2023)
Nonlinearfuelconsumption
model
Fuel
consumption
and
perishables
decayvalue
107 Exact
LRP+
VRPD
+MOP
Thispaper m-Truck,n-Drone Cost,time,and
risk
120 Heuristic
123
Annals of Operations Research
goods and vehicle-drone dispatching, to the best of our knowledge, none of these methods
focus on the optimization of multi-echelon location routing structures in the context of some
disruptions or emergency situation (e.g., infectious diseases, post-disaster scenario. etc.). (iii)
Furthermore, they did not model the value loss and transmission risk in the road network by
introducing external factors of the epidemic.
The main contributions of this paper are described as follows:
i.
ii.
Weintegratethemulti-echelonlocationroutingproblemandvehicle-droneroutingprob
lem to consider the synergy between them. To achieve low economic cost and high
distribution efficiency for cold chain transportation in the sudden disruptions or emer
gency environment, the proposed synergistic optimization framework incorporates key
practical considerations, including the selection of two types of sites (i.e., DTS and
CDS), vehicle-drone scheduling, temperature control, and transmission risk in the road
network.
The development of a new hybrid multi-objective metaheuristic approach (HMOM) for
ME-LRP-VD that outperforms existing algorithms in a large number of instance tests.
Namely, a bi-level clustering algorithm yields location strategies of DTS and EDS sites
as well a cooperative multi-objective evolutionary algorithm that can explore the Pareto
solution for the multi-echelon vehicle-drone route.
iii. Extensive numerical experiments prove the effectiveness and applicability of the pro
posed solution methodology in different scale instances. Also, the algorithm is applied
to a real-world case to demonstrate valuable managerial implications. We obtain var
ious optimal strategies that benefit from location analysis of DTS and EDS sites and
vehicle-drone routes of multi-echelon networks.
3 Problemstatementandmathematicalmodel
3.1 Problemstatement
In the multi-echelon location routing problem for cold chain transportation with vehicle
drone delivery (ME-LRP-VD), logistic enterprises deliver fresh products to their customers
through a multi-echelon logistics network with transshipment and “contactless” delivery. A
visual example of the ME-LRP-VD solution is depicted in Fig. 1. Namely, the ME-LRP
VDintegrates the multi-echelon vehicle-drone delivery routing problem (VRPD-2E) as well
as the location problem of distribution transshipment stations and contactless delivery sites
(LAP-2D).
Firstly, we can ascertain that the VRPD-2E covers two types of vehicles and three types
of delivery routes, namely the travel route for transport vehicles from the warehouse to DTS,
the travel route for delivery vehicles from DTS to CDS, and the flight route for drones from
CDStoquarantined residents. Secondly, it can also be observed that LAP-2D in the logistics
network includes two types of location decisions, namely which sites among the potential
sites becomedistribution transshipment stations (DTS) andwhichsites become“contactless”
delivery sites (CDS). Either potential site cannot be selected to operate as both types of sites
simultaneously. Note that DTS is defined as each station that a refrigerated transport vehicle
must pass through and the starting point of a refrigerated delivery vehicle. CDS stands for
the locations where drones are launched and collected, as well as the pick-up locations for
normal residents to obtain fresh goods.
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Generalized illustration of the ME-LRP-VD logistics network
For instance, 10 potential sites are selected as CDS locations and 3 potential sites are
designated as DTS locations in the ME-LRP-VD network. The refrigerated transport vehicle
departs from the depot and transports goods to each DTS along the route (Depot → DTS14
→DTS9 →DTS1 →Depot). One refrigerated delivery vehicle departs from DTS9 and
distributes goods to each CDS via the route (DTS9 → CDS6 → CDS7→CDS8→DTS9).
Residents C4, C5, and C6 are assigned to CDS8 for pickup. One drone launches from CDS7
and follows the flight route (CDS7 → C7 → CDS8) to complete delivery services for the
remaining isolated resident C6.
3.2 Symboldefinition
The ME-LRP-VD network is presented on a complete directed graph G 
node set V 
(V, A) with
N ∪S∪{0} and arc set A {(i, j)|i, j ∈ V,i j},whereN is the hub
set of potential sites (i.e., which can be opened as DTSs or CDSs), S is the resident set, 0
as the warehouse in the network. Any potential site cannot be selected to be both types of
sites simultaneously. S is composed of the node sets of normal residents S1 and quarantined
123
Annals of Operations Research
residents S2. We consider a set of drone sorties P for quarantined residents’ requests with
p ∈ P,wherep i, j,m is a potential drone mission, and i,m ∈ N,i m, j ∈ S2.
The takeoff and landing points for drones must not be the same location. The drone’s flight
sortie consists of three nodes: the initial launch location, labeled as node i; the destination
where the drone visits a quarantined resident, designated as node j; and the recovery position
where the drone returns, identified as node m. P+
i represents all sorties based on set P with a
takeoff task at node i. P−
m represents all sorties based on set P with a return task at node m.
Refrigerated transportation vehicles K1 are used for transportation from depot to DTS,
while refrigerated distribution vehicles K2 are used for distribution from DTS to CDS. All
vehicles have temperature control settings. When the temperature control of the refrigerated
vehicle k is set to w, the freshness decay coefficient of fresh products is αwk.Wedefineγw as
the infection probability of fresh products when the temperature control of the refrigerated
vehicle is set to w. We reasonably defines λ as the highest number of people who can collect
goods from the CDS node during the same period to reduce virus transmission. Table 2
summarizes the other notation used in the model formulation.
Asmentioned above, the core decision of the proposed ME-LRP-VD is the vehicle-drone
routing planning in the combined multi-echelon location problem (i.e., the site location
of DTS and CDS). The purpose of the general assumptions we provide is to simplify the
model for the sake of analysis and theoretical derivation. This paper adopts some general
assumptions to clarify the operation scenarios.
Wemakeroutingdecisionbasedontheonthetransportation routes from the depot to DTS
(i.e., first echelon), the distribution routes from DTS to CDS and the flying routes from CDS
to quarantined residents (i.e., second echelon). When these goods are delivered to the CDS
node, normal residents may use different modes of transportation (e.g., bicycles, walking,
etc.) to pick up their goods. Therefore, Assumption 1 is given as follows: After fresh products
are delivered from DTS to CDS by refrigerated distribution vehicles, normal residents can
pick up the goods at the CDS node. The detailed routes from the CDS to all normal residents
are not discussed.
In real-world, distribution centers or temporary stations typically stock sufficient spare
batteriestosupportcontinuousdroneoperations,eliminatingconcernsaboutbatteryshortages
during peak periods. Additionally, battery replacement for drones is a standardized operation
and its duration (usually 1–2 min) is negligible compared to the total delivery time. This
assumption simplifies the model without distorting the trade-off between drone range and
delivery efficiency. Therefore, Assumption 2 is given as follows: the drone can regain power
by replacing the batteries without being restricted by the number of replaceable batteries,
and the time required for each replacement can be ignored.
Euclidean distance is used to calculate the distance between nodes because it directly
reflects the straight-line distance on a two-dimensional plane. Its calculation is straightfor
ward and approximates real-world geographic conditions, making it convenient for quickly
estimating transportation costs and time. For velocity, vehicles and drones can be operated at
a fixed speed by ignoring short-term speed fluctuations (e.g., temporary traffic lights) allows
the model to focus on optimizing route structure rather than transient disturbances. There
fore, Assumption 3 is given as follows: each journey is made up of various interconnected
nodes in the network, with the distance between them being calculated in terms of Euclidean
distance. Both the heterogeneous vehicle and the homogeneous drone go through each trip
at a fixed velocity.
To avoid overcomplicating the model by having different temperature control settings
for various fresh products in the vehicle (which would introduce unnecessary complexity to
vehicle-drone strategies), we primarily focus on exploring the core logic of vehicle-drone
123
Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Notation used in the mathematical model
Sets:
N
S
K
N0
C
P
W
Parameters:
qi
ei ,li
Ei
Qd
Qk
vd
vk
βij
βij
cki
ci n
cg
gw
g∗ w
tmax
E
μ
ϕ
σ
Variables:
xk
ij
od
ij
fis
fni
yk p
Set of potential sites
Set of resident nodes,S 
S1 ∪ S2
Set of heterogeneous refrigerated vehicles,K 
K1 ∪ K2
The hub set of locations on the transportation vehicles’ travel, N0 
Set of nodes on the drones’ flight,C 
N ∪S2
Set of possible drone sorties, represented by the tuples p 
N ∪{0}
i, j,m,p ∈ P
Set of temperature control conditions
The demand of the resident i ∈ S
Service time window of resident i ∈ S
Service capacity of each potential site i ∈ N
Capacity of drone d
Capacity of vehicle k,Qk 
Flight speed of drone d
Qk1 ∪ Qk2
Driving speed of vehicle k,vk 
vk1 ∪vk2
Flight distance of the drone from node i to j
Travel distance of the vehicle from node i to j
Transport cost per distance unit for the transportation vehicles (ck1,∀k ∈ K1)orthe
distribution vehicles (ck2, ∀k ∈ K2)∈ K2
The fixed cost for operating a DTS (c1 n)oraCDS(c2 n)
The price per weight unit of fresh products
The temperature control cost per unit time of transport vehicles
The temperature control cost per unit time of distribution vehicles
Maximum duration time limit of each route
The drone’s maximum battery capacity
The power consumption per weight unit per time unit of drones
The value loss per weight unit per time unit of fresh products without temperature
control
Risk coefficient to quantify the risk of virus transmission
1 if vehicle k passes through the arc (i, j), ∀i, j ∈ N0 ∪ N, i
0 otherwise
1 if drone d passes through the arc (i, j), ∀i, j ∈ C,i
j, k ∈ K1 ∪K2,
j, d ∈ D, 0otherwise
1 if the CDS node i serves the resident s, ∀i ∈ N,s ∈ S, 0 otherwise
1 if the CDS node i is served by the DTS node n, ∀i,s ∈ N,i s, 0 otherwise
1 if the sortie p is applied in the path of the distribution vehicle k, ∀p ∈ P,k ∈ K2,
0 otherwise
123
Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 (continued)
yk
iw
zi n
qn
i
td
i
tk
i
Qd
i
ptk∗
i
CTk
i
Eid
Eijd
1 if the fresh goods at site i are delivered by vehicle k with temperature control w,
0 otherwise
1ifthenth potential site is opened as a DTS (z1 n 1) or a CDS (z2 n 1), 0
otherwise
Quantities of products delivered by DTSs (q1
i )oraCDSs(q2
i )
The time when drone d arrives at the quarantined resident i ∈ S2
The time when transport vehicle k arrives at the DTS node i ∈ N0
The load of the drone d when it leaves node i,∀i ∈ C
The time when delivery vehicle k arrives at the CDS node i ∈ N
The time when the drone on delivery vehicle k arrives at CDS node,∀i ∈ N,k ∈ K2
The power value of the drone d leaving from the node i,∀i ∈ C,d ∈ D
The power consumption of drone d flies over the arc (i, j),∀i, j ∈ C,i
j, d ∈ D
collaborative operations. Therefore, Assumption 4 is given as follows: The products required
by residents belong to the same type, and the required temperature control ranges of all
products are also the same. Only refrigerated transport and delivery vehicles can adjust the
temperature control, while drones cannot set the temperature control.
3.3 Modelformulation
3.3.1 Multi-objective function
Indicator of economic cost (F1) includes transportation cost f1, fixedcost f2, tempera
ture control cost f3, and value loss of fresh goods f4. Since the refrigerated truck can
make temperature control adjustments throughout the delivery process, the loss produced
in this process is related to the goal temperature of temperature control. Note that cg · q1
i
and cg · q2
i represent the initial value of fresh products in the first echelon transportation
and the second echelon distribution. The freshness of fresh goods varies within the inter
val [1, 0), and the initial freshness of fresh goods is considered to be 1. e−αwk·tk
i and
e−αwk·ptk∗
i
represent the exponential decay models for calculating the freshness of fresh
goods over time in first echelon transportation and the second echelon distribution, respec
tively. Then, cg · q1
i · e−αwk·tk
i and cg · q2
i · e−αwk·ptk∗
i
are utilized to compute the current
value of fresh products. Next, the initial value minus the current value, i.e., cg · q1
i minus
cg · q1
i · e−αwk·tk
i , cg · q2
i minus cg · q2
i · e−αwk·ptk∗
i
, the value loss cost of fresh products
can be further obtained. Namely, cg · q1
i − cg · q1
i · e−αwk·tk
i 
cg · q2
i − cg · q2
i · e−αwk·ptk∗
i
cg · q2
i · (1 − e−αwk·ptk∗
i
cg · q1
i · (1 − e−αwk·tk
i )and
) define the one method to calculate
the value loss. However, we consider that the temperature control of the drone cannot be set
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
duringflight,weusethegeneral formofvalueloss tocalculateit.Finally,weadopt two
methodsforcalculatingvalueloss,asshowninEq. (4).Forcalculationdetailsofvarious
costs,pleaserefertotheformulas(1)to(4).
f1
i∈N0 j∈N0k∈K1
ck1·βij ·xk
ij +
i∈N j∈Nk∈K2
ck2·βij ·xk
ij +
i∈C j∈Cd∈D
cd ·βij ·od
ij
(1)
f2
n∈N
c1
n ·z1
n+c2
n ·z2
n (2)
f3
i∈N0w∈Wk∈K1
gw·tk
i ·yk
iw+
i∈Nw∈Wk∈K2
g∗
w·ptk∗
i ·yk
iw (3)
f4 cg·
⎛
⎝
i∈N0w∈Wk∈K1
q1
i ·(1−e−αwk·t k
i )·yk
iw+
i∈Nw∈Wk∈K2
q2
i ·(1−e−αwk·pt k∗
i )·yk
iw
⎞
⎠+
d∈Di∈S2
qi ·ϕ·td
i
(4)
Further,theindicatorofdeliveryefficiency(F2)includesdeliverytimeandtransmission
riskintheroadnetwork.ThedetectionofCOVID-19onthepackagingofsomecoldchain
productshasarousedsocialconcernandvigilance.Theseincidentsillustratetheriskofvirus
transmissionincoldchaintransportationduringtheepidemicandhighlighttheimportance
andnecessityofcoldchainsafety.Whenavehiclevisitsnodei, theriskoftransmissionin
theroadnetworkat thistimeincludesthreeparts: theinitial infectionriskofthenodeM0
i ,
theriskofvirustransmissioncarriedbythetransportationvehiclealongtheroue(h, i)ζhi,
andtheriskofvirustransmissioncarriedbythefreshfoodpackagingwhenunloadingri.
TheinitialinfectionriskatthedistributionsiteM0
i θ×Si
2 iscalculatedbymultiplying
thenumberofquarantinedresidents(i.e., Si
2 )withintheservicerangeofthedistribution
siteandtheinfectioncoefficientofquarantinedindividuals(i.e.,θ).Theriskoftherouteζij
iscalculatedbyζij χi ·M0
i ·xk
ij ,whereχi represents theprobabilityofcross-infection
χi (1−e−si)×ϒiwhenthevehicleisatthenodei.Andsi istheunloadingtimeofthe
vehicleintheepidemicareai,whichisproportionaltothelocaldemand.Whenthevehicle
servesnodei,thatis,thedeliverymethodisface-to-facecontactdeliveryϒi 1;otherwise,
itmeansthatthedroneservesnodei,andthedeliverymethodisnon-contactdeliveryϒi 0.
Theriskofcross-infectionrj isobtainedbyrj ζij·γwwhenfreshproductsareunloadedat
pointj,andγwisdefinedastheinfectionprobabilityoffreshproductswhenthetemperature
controlof therefrigeratedvehicleisset tow.Eventually,whenallnodesintheepidemic
areaarevisitedbyvehicles, thecorresponding transmissionrisk in the roadnetwork is
i∈VM0
i + k∈K i∈N0 j∈N0
χi·M0
i ·xk
ij ·(1+γw).
Unliketraditionallocationroutingproblemmodelsforfreshgoodsdelivery,theobjective
ofourproposedME-LRP-VDis todeterminethelocationstrategiesofDTSandCDSas
wellasthemulti-echelonvehicle-droneroutestoservealldemandswiththeoptimal total
economiccostandthedistributionefficiency.Fortheproposedmulti-echelonlocationrouting
planningproblem,bi-objectivefunctionsF1andF2areconstructedbyformulas(5)and(6).
minF1 f1+ f2+f3+ f4 (5)
minF2
k∈K1i∈N0 j∈N0
βij
vk1
·xk
ij +
k∈K2i∈N j∈N
βij
vk2
·xk
ij +
d∈Di∈C j∈C
βij
vd
·od
ij
123
Annals of Operations Research
M0
i + 
⎞
⎛
+σ ·
⎝
3.3.2 Location and assignment constraints
χi · M0
i · xk
ij · (1 + γw)
⎠
i∈V
k∈Ki∈N0 j∈N0
fis 1,∀s ∈ S
i∈N
qs · fis ≤ Ei · z1
i ,∀i ∈ N
s∈S
i∈S
i∈N
fis ≤ λ,∀i ∈ N
s∈S1
qi · fis q2
i · z2
i ,∀i ∈ N
q2
i · fni 
q1
n · z1
n, ∀n ∈ N
z1
n+z2
n ≤ 1,∀n ∈ N
xk
ni ≤ fni,∀i ∈ N,n ∈ N,k ∈ K1
xk
in ≤ fni,∀i ∈ N,n ∈ N,k ∈ K1
od
is ≤ fis,∀i ∈ N,s ∈ S2,d ∈ D
od
si ≤ fis,∀i ∈ N,s ∈ S2,d ∈ D
xk
ij + fni − fnj ≤ 1,∀i, j ∈ N,i j,n ∈ N,k ∈ K2
xk
ij + fnj − fni ≤ 1,∀i, j ∈ N,i j,n ∈ N,k ∈ K2
od
sh + fis − fih ≤ 1,∀s,h ∈ S2,s h,i ∈ N,d ∈ D
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
od
sh + fih − fis ≤ 1,∀s,h ∈ S2,s h,i ∈ N,d ∈ D
Constraints (7) guarantee that a single potential site is designated for each resident to pre
vent multiple assignments. Constraints (8) represent that the service demand cannot exceed
the service capacity of each site. Constraints (9) impose a limitation on the number of indi
viduals collecting goods from the CDS node during any given time period, thereby aiming to
promote a staggered pickup schedule for these residents. Constraints (10) and (11) indicate
the delivery volume of fresh goods at CDS and DTS respectively. Constraints (12) mean that
anypotential site can only be selected to open as onetypeofsite at most. Constraints (13) and
(14)ensure that a distribution vehicle travels from a DTS to a CDS or from a CDS to a DTS
only if that CDS is assigned to the corresponding DTS. Constraints (15) and (16) guarantee
that a drone flies from a CDS to a quarantined resident or from a quarantined resident to
a CDS only if that quarantined resident is assigned to that CDS. Constraints (17) and (18)
impose that if a distribution vehicle visits two CDS nodes consecutively, and they must be
assigned to the same DTS node. Constraints (19) and (20) state that two epidemic area nodes
must be assigned to the same CDS node if they are visited consecutively by the same drone.
(20)
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
3.3.3Vehicleconstraints
i∈N0∪Nk∈K
xk
ij zj,∀j∈N (21)
i∈N0∪N
xk
ih−
j∈N0∪N
xk
hj 0,∀h∈N,k∈K1∪K2 (22)
j∈N
xk
0j 1,∀k∈K1 (23)
i∈N
xk
i0 1,∀k∈K1 (24)
i∈N
xk
ni 1,∀k∈K2,n∈N (25)
j∈N
xk
jn 1,∀k∈K2,n∈N (26)
tk
i +βij
vk
·xk
ij +si−M(1−xk
ij)≤tk
j ,∀i, j∈N0∪N,k∈K1∪K2 (27)
i∈N0 j∈N
xk
ij ·q1
i ≤Qk1,∀k∈K1 (28)
i∈N j∈N
xk
ij ·q2
i ≤Qk2,∀k∈K2 (29)
Constraints(21)stipulatethateverychosensitemustonlybeservedoncebyarefrigerated
transportvehicleorarefrigerateddeliveryvehicle.Constraints(22)statetheflowconservation
conditionsintheheterogeneousvehicleroutes,thatis,vehiclesmustleavethesitenodeafter
visitingthesite.Constraints(23)and(24)representtherefrigeratedtransportvehiclesdepart
fromthewarehouseandreturntothewarehouseafterservingallDTSs.Constraints(25)and
(26)specifythat therefrigerateddeliveryvehiclesstart fromtheDTSandgobacktothe
DTSafterfinishingtheirservice.Constraints(27)determinethetimewhenvehiclesarrive
at thecorrespondingsitesanddelineate theeliminateconstraints forvehicles’ sub-tours.
Constraints (28)and(29)guarantee that the total requirementsof freshproductsonany
givenvehicleroutemustnotexceedthemaximumloadofarefrigeratedtransportvehicle
andarefrigerateddeliveryvehicle,respectively.
3.3.4Droneconstraints
i∈Cd∈D
od
ij 1,∀j∈S2 (30)
i∈C
od
ih−
j∈C
od
hj 0,∀h∈S2,d∈D (31)
od
ij 0,∀i, j∈N,i j (32)
0≤Eijd≤E·od
ij,∀i, j∈C,i j,d∈D (33)
i∈C j∈C
Eijd ·od
ij≤E,∀d∈D (34)
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
μ·Qd
i · βij
vd
−E·(1−od
ij)≤Eijd≤μ·Qd
i · βij
vd
,∀i, j∈C,i j,d∈D (35)
Ejd+μ·Qd
i · βij
vd
≤Eid+M(1−od
ij),∀d∈D (36)
j∈S2d∈D
od
ij≤|D|·z2
i ,∀i∈N (37)
i∈C j∈C
βij ·od
ij≤Ld,∀d∈D (38)
td
i+βij
vd
·od
ij +si−M(1−od
ij)≤td
j ,∀i, j∈C,d∈D (39)
i∈C j∈S2
od
ij ·qj≤Qd,∀d∈D (40)
h∈S2
od
ih+
h∈S2/{s}
od
hs≤1+ fis,∀i∈N,s∈S,d∈D (41)
Constraints(30)stipulateeveryquarantinedresidentlocatedwithintheserviceregionof
thedeliverysitecanreceiveoneservicefromthedroneonlyonce.Constraints(31)enforce
themaintenanceofaflowbalancewithinthedrone’sflightpath, therebyensuringthat the
dronedepartsfromthequarantinedresident immediatelyafterservingit.Constraints(32)
specifythatdronesareprohibitedfromflyingdirectlyfromonesitetoanother.Constraints
(33)and(34) limit thepowerconsumptionof thedrone’sbatterythroughthearcandthe
singlerouteforanydrone.Constraints(35)calculatethebatteryconsumptionforeachtrip
whileconstraints(36)keeptrackofthebatteryconsumptionlevelateachquarantinedresident
node.Constraints(37)meanthatthenumberofarcsdepartingfromthechosendeliverysite
cannotexceedthenumberofdronesutilized.Constraints(38)statethattheflyingradiusof
anydroneislimitedtoitsmaximumpermissibledistance.Constraints(39)determinethetime
whendronesarriveatthesites,whilealsodelineatingtheconstraintsthateliminatesub-tours
fordrones.Constraints (40)guarantee that theaggregaterequirements fromquarantined
individualsonanygivenflyingrouteshallnotexceedthemaximumloadofeachdrone.
Constraints(41)stipulatethateveryquarantinedindividualmustbeallocatedtothechosen
potentialCDS.
3.3.5Synchronizationandotherconstraints
2yk
p≤
h∈N\{i}
xk
ih+
l∈N\{m}
xk
lm,∀k∈K2,p i, j,m ∈P (42)
p∈P+
i
yk
p≤1,∀k∈K2,i∈N (43)
p∈P−m
yk
p≤1,∀k∈K2,m∈N (44)
ptk
i −tmax(1−
p∈P+
i
yk
p)≤CTk
i ,∀i∈N,k∈K2 (45)
ptk
i +tmax(1−
p∈P+
i
yk
p)≥CTk
i ,∀i∈N,k∈K2 (46)
123
Annals of Operations Research
ptk∗
m −tmax(1−
ptk∗
m +tmax(1 −
tk
i , ptk∗
yk
p) ≤ CTk
m,∀m ∈ N,k ∈ K2
p∈P−m
p∈P−m
i
yk
p) ≥ CTk
m,∀m ∈ N,k ∈ K2
≥0,∀i ∈ N,k ∈ K
td
i ≥ 0,∀i ∈ S2,d ∈ D
CTk
i ≥ 0,∀i ∈ N,k ∈ K
q1
i , q1
2 ≥ 0,∀i ∈ N
xk
ij 
yk
iw 
{0, 1},∀i, j ∈ N0 ∪ N,k ∈ K
od
ij 
yk
p 
fis, fni 
{0, 1},∀i, j ∈ C,d ∈ D
{0, 1},∀i ∈ N,w∈ W,k ∈ K
{0, 1},∀p ∈ P,k ∈ K2
{0, 1},∀s ∈ S,∀n,i ∈ N
zn, z1
n, z2
n 
{0, 1},∀n ∈ N
(47)
(48)
(49)
(50)
(51)
(52)
(53)
(54)
(55)
(56)
(57)
(58)
Constraints (42) dictate the takeoff and collect sites of the drone must coincide with
locations visited by the refrigerated delivery vehicle. Constraints (43) and (44) indicate that
the drone can launch and land at most once at each CDS. Constraints (45) to (48) represent
the time synchronization constraints of refrigerated delivery vehicle and drone. Constraints
(49) to (58) represent variable values and types.
4 Hybridmulti-objective metaheuristic algorithm
4.1 OverviewoftheHMOMalgorithm
Since our research is an integrated problem, that is, site location selection of multi-echelon
logistics facilities and vehicle-drone delivery route optimization. Most of the related research
onthis typeofproblemissolvedbymetaheuristicintelligentalgorithms(Abbassietal.,2021;
Govindan et al., 2014; Lan et al., 2022). It is difficult for a single metaheuristic algorithm
to solve two sub-problems at the same time. By recognizing that our ME-LRP-VD model
is a combination of different structural elements, such as products, nodes (depot, CDSs and
DTSs), vehicles, and drones, we develop a hybrid multi-objective metaheuristic algorithm
based ondecomposition to provide good-quality solutions within a plausible amount of time:
abi-levelclusteringalgorithmandacooperativemulti-objectiveevolutionaryalgorithmbased
on the objective function decomposition (CMOEA).
Two types of site location strategies (i.e., distribution transshipment stations and con
tactless delivery sites) are considered in the bi-level clustering operation, and the regional
decomposition belonging to the selected stations is obtained. The CMOEA method based on
objective function decomposition is used to assign independent populations to each objective
123
Annals of Operations Research
CMOEA 
(a) Regional decomposition
F1 objective
F2 objective
Single objective differential 
evolution
No-dominated solution set pool
Pareto sorting
Optimal solution set
(b) Objective decomposition
CDS
Depot DTS Quarantined residents
Fig. 2 General diagram for the HMOM optimization
Echelon1 route
(c) Optimization and adjustment
Echelon2 route
Drone route
function for optimization, but there is a problem that the solutions are easily biased towards
the extreme values of each objective and deviate from the Pareto frontier. For this reason,
additional populations are introduced to guide the direction of evolution through the informa
tion sharing strategy, and the optimal solutions of each independent population are combined
to generate the Pareto non-dominated solution set. Furthermore, based on density estimation,
thevalueofeachcrowdingdistanceisobtained.Paretosortedvaluesareusedforselectionand
crowding distance is used for differentiation within ranks. After the elite solution is selected,
various crossover and mutation operators are designed for route optimization. Local search
rules are introduced, and various neighborhood operators are designed to improve the solu
tion and avoid falling into the local optimum solution. We simulate a basic executive process
of the hybrid multi-objective metaheuristic algorithm, as depicted in Fig. 2.
4.2 Bi-level clustering algorithm
In the first stage, the optimization goal is to formulate an effective location strategy for distri
bution transshipment stations and contactless delivery sites, that is, to determine the decision
variables z1 n and z2 n in the LAP-2D problem. According to the feedback of the path opti
mization algorithm, if the delivery path cost of some clustering units is found to be too high,
the clustering algorithm can re-evaluate and adjust the cluster center or cluster boundary to
further optimize distribution efficiency and cost. We assign all residents to corresponding
cluster centers and all contactless delivery sites to appropriate distribution transshipment
stations. Then, the respective service areas of the CDS and DTS in the logistics network
are obtained to achieve preliminary optimization of the ME-LRP-VD logistics network. The
bi-level clustering algorithm is used to divide different epidemic areas into small clusters and
determine the center of each cluster. Refrigerated delivery vehicles pass through all cluster
centers, while drones serve the needs of quarantined residents in each cluster. The clustering
framework is established on the time–space coordinate system, and the time window’s flex
ibility is incorporated as a criterion for classifying all residents. Based on the geographical
location and time window of all residents, clustering units are formed by dividing different
epidemic areas, and multiple attributes within a clustering unit are similar.
Assumethatnodeiinthenetworkischaracterizedbygeographicalcoordinates(xi, yi)and
a time window[ei,li]. The division of the time axis allows normal residents to pick up goods
at staggered time. The purpose is to give a reduction in the likelihood of physical contact and
cross infections while also optimizing the violation of time windows as much as possible.
We carry out a straightforward linearization on the representation of the time window by
123
Annals of Operations Research
Time axis
(a) The routes before clustering
C6
C7
C3
C2
Y axis
C1
(b) The routes after clustering
C6
C7
C3
C2
C5
C4
Demand point
 Delivery site
C1
C4
Time window
Violation of time window
Actual routes
C5
Spatio-temporal routes
Fig. 3 Comparison of route results before and after bi-level clustering
X axis
the form twi ei(li −ei) (li max −ei min) to yield the improved time coordinate twi.For
all residents, the ending and beginning moments in the time windows are denoted by li max
and ei min, respectively. η represents the conversion coefficient between time and distance to
ensure that different dimensional indicators are in the same range. Therefore, the improved
distance between two points is regarded as a spatio-temporal distance, and it is defined as
dij 
(xi − xj)2 +(yi − yj)2 +η(twi −twj)2 1/2 .
The bi-level clustering framework is shown in Fig. 3, the geographical position and time
windowofdemandpointaredepictedusingX,Y-axes,andtime-axis.Thetime-axisisdivided
to reduce time window violations and form the same period, thereby facilitating staggered
pick-up and reducing face-to-face contact. That is, these nodes clustered in the same spatio
temporal range have similar geographical coordinates and time windows. Let A denote the
set of all clustering units, and then ca denote the set of residents in the ath clustering unit.
All residents are divided into |A| clustering units. The initial positions of cluster centers
are randomly assigned, and each cluster center represents a delivery site. As the clustering
iterative process proceeds, the cluster centroids are continuously updated based on the status
of the residents assigned to the cluster. Bi is the spatio-temporal coordinate (˜xi, ˜yi,twi)of
nodei. Bai 
isthespatio-temporalcoordinateofresidentiinclustera, Ba isthespatio-temporal
coordinate of the cluster center, and Bn is the spatio-temporal coordinate of candidate site n.
The number of candidate sites is |N|, the numbers of DTS and CDS (z1 n and z2 n) both vary
within the range of [1,|N| − 1], and the sum of DTSs and CDSs satisfies z1 n + z2 n ≤ |N|.
4.2.1 The upper-level iterative optimization
When solving the multi-echelon facility location problem, the bi-level clustering method
aims to identify appropriate DTSs and CDSs. This approach simultaneously ensures that the
total spatio-temporal distances for both resident-CDS and DTS-CDS pairs are minimized.
The primary operation steps consist of iterative optimization for every clustering plan and
comparative evaluation for various clustering plans. The specific steps are as follows:
123
Annals of Operations Research
Step 1: For all residential points, we assign the residential points to the corresponding
clustering units and minimize the spatio-temporal distance between the residents and the
cluster center by Jc 
min a∈A ai∈ca 
Bai 
− Ba
2 .
Step 2: For contactless delivery sites, we divide the different cluster centers Ba through
the location coordinates of all residents. The equation J1n 
min a∈A n∈N|Bn − Ba|2 is
used to minimize the distance between the cluster center and candidate sites. We select the
candidate site with the shortest distance from the cluster center as the contactless delivery
site.
J2n 
Step 3: For distribution transshipment sites, we divide different cluster centers
Da through the location coordinates of all contactless delivery sites, and apply
min a∈A n∈N|Bn −Da|2 to minimize the distance between the cluster centers
and candidate sites. Those candidate sites with the shortest distance from the cluster center
are used as distribution transshipment sites.
4.2.2 The lower-level comparison optimization
After iterative optimization within a clustering scheme, different clustering schemes need to
be compared. We identify the most effective clustering solutions, including the location and
quantity of clustering centers, by utilizing silhouette values, thereby mitigating the subjectiv
ity of manual decisions on the number of clusters. The silhouette values of DTSs’ and CDSs’
clustering plans need to be calculated separately to demonstrate the advantages of both site
location strategies. The silhouette value Sn represents the proximity of each point in the
clustering unit to the adjacent clustering unit (Struyf et al., 1997). By calculating the average
silhouette value S
n∈ca 
Sn |ca|, the distinguishing effect of the generated clustering
unit on the datais displayed. Silhouette value is a commonindicatorto evaluate the clustering
effect, which takes into account the elements of both cohesiveness an and separation bn.
They are utilized in the computation of the silhouette value Sn for node n by
Sn (bn −an) max(an,bn). In particular, the average distance between the node n and the
other sample nodes that are grouped within the same cluster is an. Also, bn denotes the
average distance from point n in other clusters to all sample points in this cluster, that is, the
nearest average distance found by traversing all other clusters. The value of S in one cluster
ing plan is defined as the average silhouette value across all nodes n. The clustering plan’s
performanceissuperiorwhen S approaches1.Thebi-levelclusteringmethodisimplemented
only in scenarios where there are a minimum of two or more potential sites.
4.3 Initial population of COMEA
In the bi-objective ME-LRP-VD, we need to determine the nodes visited by refrigerated
transport vehicles, refrigerated delivery vehicles, and drone launch nodes respectively, as
well as the order of nodes they visit. The representation of the solution is a key factor
affecting the performance of the metaheuristic algorithm. If these decisions are considered
simultaneously in the representation of the solution, the algorithm may take too long to run.
Therefore, the site selection results solved by the clustering algorithm are used as the input
of the route optimization. In this paper, the two one-dimensional chromosomes X1 and X2
represent site selection and the refrigerated transport vehicle route, and the two-dimensional
chromosome X3 representstherefrigerateddeliveryvehicleanddroneroutes.Figure4shows
anME-LRP-VDsolutionwith2quarantinedresidents,8contactlessdelivery sites, 2 delivery
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Solution representation of multi-echelon route for vehicle-drone
transshipment sites, 2 drones, 1 refrigerated transport vehicle, and 2 refrigerated delivery
vehicles.
In the coding process, X1 is defined as the location result obtained by the clustering
algorithm, that is, the list of CDS nodes andDTSnodes.Thesizeof X1 isequaltothenumber
of distribution sites, and the value of each element is the index to which the distribution site
is assigned. The origin and destination for the transport vehicle are indicated by a dark 0,
while the DTS is marked with orange.X2 identifies the order in which transport vehicles
visit the two DTSs after departing from the warehouse. The first line of X3 represents the
visit sequence of delivery vehicles starting from the DTS to the CDS. The second row of X3
specifies the CDS nodes that serve as takeoff and return points for drones, and the order in
which quarantined residents are visited. The chosen DTSs marked with orange serve as the
origin and destination points for the delivery vehicle. The locations where the drone takes
off and lands are called CDSs and are identified with dark gray.
Routing planning is carried out according to the regional decomposition results yielded by
bi-level clustering optimization. In our paper, the scanning algorithm is applied for the initial
population generation. We take the positive direction of the X-axis as the scanning ray and
scan in the counterclockwise direction. Then each distribution site and each residential point
are scanned separately to form the scanning angle. CDS location and resident node are sorted
by angle size. The delivery area is divided by using the capacity of vehicles and drones as
constraints. Thus, an initial route for vehicle-drone collaborative delivery is generated. In the
process of algorithm implementation, the limitations of the site location and the planning of
123
Annals of Operations Research
vehicle-drone routes need to be considered comprehensively to thoroughly test the viability
of the yielded solution.
4.4 Geneticoperation
4.4.1 Elite solution selection
We adopt the elite retention strategy with non-dominated sorting and crowding distance,
thereby increasing the feasibility of the solution after applying crossover and mutation oper
ations. The population’s top individuals are selected by using the elite strategy, and thus a
new Pareto optimal solution is chosen based on the selection rules. It is essential to check
whether the quality of the candidate solution is better than or the same as the worst solution.
Note that the basic rule is stipulated in the following. The one with a lower non-dominance
rank is chosen if the non-dominance ranks of the two individuals are different. Also, the one
with a greater crowding distance is chosen if two individuals have identical non-dominance
ranks.
Crossover and mutation operators help the algorithm conduct a broad search in the space
of solutions. Various types of typical mutation operators and crossover operators need to be
adjusted according to the characteristics of the problem. Since the ME-LRP-VD solution
gives different chromosomes based on the location order of DTSs and CDSs, the algorithm
needs to perform genetic operations on the routes of two types of vehicles.
4.4.2 Crossover operators
For the one-dimensional chromosome X1 of one transport vehicle, two parents are selected
on the route of the refrigerated transport vehicle. Two crossover operators are used, the first
is the partial mapping crossover operator (PMX), and the second is order crossover (OX).
The repeated genes appearing in the two parent chromosomes can be replaced according to
the mapping relationship, i.e., the selected gene sequences (3, 4, 6) and (5, 7, 10) form a
matching rule in the parent chromosomes Pa1 and Pa2. OX crossover randomly selects two
sequences in two chromosomes. Theselected gene sequence (1, 8, 7, 10) from the first parent
chromosomePa1ispasseddowntothefirstoffspringCh1.Subsequently,the remaining gene
nodes from the second parent chromosome Pa2, excluding the ones already mentioned, are
inherited to Ch1 in the sequence found in Pa2. Likewise, the same steps are taken to produce
a second offspring Ch2. Figure 5 (a) and Fig. 5 (c) illustrate the operation process of the
PMXandthe OXoperators, respectively.
In addition, two crossover operators are designed for routes of refrigerated delivery vehi
cles. The first one still uses the PMX operator. The second method applies the uniform
crossover operator (UX) to the one-dimensional chromosomes X2 of different delivery vehi
cle routes, as shown in Fig. 5 (b). To this end, a binary vector with the same size as the
chromosome is first generated for each solution. Then, in accordance with the corresponding
values of the vector, the corresponding positions in the two parent chromosomes (Pa1 and
Pa2) are crossed to generate offspring (Ch1 and Ch2). For the delivery vehicle route X2, if
the corresponding position of S1 is 1, it indicates that there are quarantined residents within
the service range of its corresponding CDS node. These positions define the genes that are
retained in Pa1. If the corresponding position is 0, the retained gene in Pa2 is defined. In
this case, the genes corresponding to Pa1 and Pa2 need to be kept unchanged and retained
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Crossover operator
in the two offspring chromosomes. The remaining elements in the two parent chromosomes
are cross transformed.
4.4.3 Mutation operators
Formutationsinthechromosome X1 and X2 deliverypathways,wemainlytakethefollowing
steps. The number of genes to be mutated is randomly decided, and one of three operations
(insertion, exchange, or reversal) is applied to the solution. In each run, all three operators
are not used simultaneously to avoid the solution process becoming overly complex. The
mutation operation swaps the positions of two randomly selected genes in the chromosome.
The mutation operation selects the node positions in the chromosome that have a higher risk
of transmission and then operates to get a more diverse solution. Therefore, this paper uses
random rules to select one of these three operators.
a) Swap: randomly select two nodes on the same route of the vehicle (or drone) and then
their positions are swapped.
b) Insertion: randomly select a node in a route of a vehicle (or drone) and then reinsert the
node into other locations on this route.
c) Reversion: randomly select at least two nodes on the same route of the vehicle (or drone)
and then reverse their positions.
4.4.4 Differential evolution strategy
Adifferential evolution strategy is introduced for chromosomal mutation. Xm
i is the original
variablevector, Xm
best istheoptimalsolutioninthesubpopulationofthe Fm objectivefunction,
Xm
i1 and Xm
i2 are two individuals randomly selected from the population, γi is the mutation
factor. To regulate the direction of the evolution of the population, let Pr be the randomly
selected solution from a pool of non-dominated solutions.
Vm
i 
Xm
i + γ1 Xm
best − Xm
i +γ2 Xm
i1 − Xm
i2 +γ3 Pr − Xm
i
(59)
In Eq. (59), Xm
i preserves the search information of the individuals themselves to ensure
the convergence of the algorithm. (Xm
best − Xm
i ) enhances the algorithm’s search ability in the
direction of the Fm objective.(Xm
i1−Xm
i2) addsrandomperturbationstomaintainthediversity
123
Annals of Operations Research
of the population. (Pr − Xm
i ) adds the search information of the other populations, which
enhances the algorithm’s search ability in the direction of the Pareto optimal solution set.
Thealgorithm mutation process performs the mutation of the allocation relationship between
CDS nodes, DTS nodes and demand nodes first, and then the mutation of the distribution
paths.
4.5 Improvednon-dominatedsolutionsearchprocess
Thenumberofsolutionsexploredwhileperformingiterationsaffectstherateofconvergence.
Selecting a single solution to explore at each iteration might lead to slower convergence and
poor diversity in the final approximate Pareto front (Lian et al., 2016). Additionally, it may
not be efficient to explore all non-dominated solutions in every iteration. In early iterations of
the search, non-dominated solutions have a higher probability of being dominated in the next
iteration. The number of non-dominated solutions explored by the HMOM algorithm should
be contingent on the quality of the current set in the non-dominated solutions. In cases where
there is a likelihood of uncovering a new non-dominated solution, it would be prudent to
opt for a solution set containing fewer non-dominated solutions. The point with the smallest
distance from the ideal point in the solution space is the effective point.
The crowding distance of each non-boundary individual in the non-dominated set U is
determined recursively byU(di) U(di)+(UFj
i+1 −UFj
i−1) (Fmax
j
UFm
−Fmin
j
), whereUFm
i+1 and
i−1 describe the value of jth objective function for individuals, i.e., (i +1)thand(i − 1)th in
the set U, respectively. Fmax
j
and Fmin
j
is the maximumandminimumvaluesofjthobjective
function. According to the basic principle of HMOM, the Pareto front of different ranks
is obtained as follows: Rank1, Rank2, Rank3, etc. In the set U, the Pareto front Rank1
expresses the optimal solutions in the optimization solution set.
TheHMOMneedstofindothereffectivepointsinthesolutionspaceasmuchaspossible.In
this scenario, the initial solution can be continuously improved. We embed a multi-objective
optimization strategy that mainly increases the search for non-dominated solutions. A func
tion is defined to evaluate the distance between the objective function value of the solution
s and the ideal node (Fmin
1 ,Fmin
2 ).Weneedtofindasolution s that minimizes the following
function:
F(s) max × F1(s)−Fmin
1
Fmax
2
, (1 − )× F2(s)− Fmin
1
−Fmin
1
Fmax
2
−Fmin
2
(60)
where is a weighting factor, and ∈ (0,1). In the process of searching for non-dominated
solutions, the approximate Pareto front is found by setting the dominant solution set. We find
the efficient frontier with the minimum total logistics cost (i.e., the dominant solution set
with the smallest Fmin
1
value). This solution is used as a starting point and a tabu search is
performed on it to jump out of the local optimum.
4.6 Localsearchrule
Given the inadequacies of CMOEA in the search direction, the local search rule is primarily
employed for neighborhood space search to avoid local optimal situations. In the algorithm
iteration of HMOM, we designed a tabu list specifically for searching vehicle-drone delivery
routes. This list saves the most recently examined solutions, which are chosen based on their
123
Annals of Operations Research
specific attributes. Solutions identified as locally optimal are marked to prevent redundant
investigation in subsequent iterations. This measure can effectively increase the algorithm’s
search capability in the Pareto optimal solution direction, thereby enabling the entire algo
rithm to explore a wider solution space. Neighborhood operators are utilized to generate
new solutions from the current solution. This paper designs several operators in the tabu
search process. The efficiency of developed neighborhood operators plays a pivotal role in
the quality of responses obtained in the local search procedures.
a) Subsequence exchange: randomly select two subsequences from two drone routes and
then exchange positions.
b) Subsequence shifting: randomly select a subsequence from a drone route and then ran
domly shift it to another position in the solution.
c) Subsequence reverse: randomly select a subsequence from a drone route and reverse it.
d) SwapofDTSsites: select two DTS sites with maximum and minimum sending quantity
and then exchange their allocated customers.
e) Swap of CDS sites: randomly select two closely located CDS sites and exchange their
allocated customers.
5 Computationalexperiments
Sections 5.2–5.4 of this paper conduct experimental research through a real-world instance.
In the ME-LRP-VDoptimization,thelocationstrategy of transshipment sites and contactless
distribution sites as well as the distribution paths of multi-echelon facilities were analyzed.
The sensitivity analysis of the value loss coefficient of fresh products was conducted. To
evaluate the performance of the proposed hybrid metaheuristic algorithm, Sect. 5.5 uses the
adapted Solomon data to generate calculation examples of different sizes. The algorithms
are implemented in MATLABR2018a. Where applicable, all the experiments are conducted
on a computer with Intel(R), Core i5-1135G7 CPU 2.13 GHz and 16 GB RAM.
5.1 Instances generation
Twotypesofinstancesareappliedtoevaluatetheperformanceofourmathematicalmodeland
solution methodology. Oneset is areal-life instance for reporting the results and applicability
of the proposed ME-LRP-VD optimization in infectious disease epidemics. We select the
constructed calculation examples and then add relevant parameters to convert them into cal
culation examples available in our article. The coordinates, time windows, product demands,
and other information about the warehouse, 25 potential sites, and 100 residential areas in
the logistics network are known. The following sections (Sects. 5.2–5.4) describe how the
multi-echelon location routing optimization considering delivery transshipment stations and
contactless delivery sites gradually takes effect.
Someparameters involved in the ME-LRP-VD network are determined based on existing
research (Pina-Pardo et al., 2021) and through extensive pretests. Some parameters in the
model are set as follows: ck1 
2, ck2 
c2 n 
10, Qk1 
1000 kg, Qk2 
1.5, 1, cd 
200 kg, ϑ 
0.5, cg 
0.8, En 
25CNY/kg, c1 n 15,
5000 kg , vk1 
vk2 
40 km/h, vd 
80 km/h,
50 km/h. Every resident has a random demand qs for perishable
goods determined byauniformdistribution [2,7]. The time the refrigerated transport vehicle
123
Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Overview of the key features of the dataset
Logistics network
Number of potential sites
Quantity of residents (Normal/
quarantined)
Resident
density
A1-A10
B1-B10
C1-C10
D1-D10
E1-E10
8,7,6,5,4
12,11,10,9,8
20,18,16,14,12
24,22,20,18,16
30,28,26,24,22
40(30/10)
60(40/20)
90(60/30)
120(80/40)
150(100/50)
0.0020
0.0031
0.0046
0.0061
0.0077
leaves the warehouse is 0. The relevant algorithm parameters are set as: popsize 
genmax 130, Pc 0.9, Pm 0.1,tsin 50.
150,
Moreover,anothertypeofinstancesetisbasedonsomewell-knownVRPTWtestproblems
provided by Solomon (1987). The calculation examples for algorithm testing are generated
through the adapted Solomon data. We convert them to ME-LRP-VD instances to test the
validity of the ME-LRP-VD formulation and the effectiveness of the HMOM metaheuris
tic algorithm (Sect. 5.5). Logistics networks of different scales cover various quantities of
residents, some of whom may be normal people while others are in quarantine. To more
effectively demonstrate the performance of the HMOM algorithm in solving the VRPD-2E
problem, the test experiment is analyzed based on the site location results of different net
works. The relevant data set characteristics of the logistics network are shown in Table 3. All
residents’ horizontal and vertical coordinates are derived from a uniform distribution [1,140].
5.2 Locationanalysis of DTSandCDS
To evaluate the advantages of the FLRR-2E that considers delivery transshipment sites and
contactless delivery sites in the epidemic environment, we compared it with the following
modes.Fixedtransshipmentsites(FVRP),traditionalvehicledelivery(VRP),andcontactless
delivery (FLRP) are given for a detailed comparison. The traditional distribution method is
that refrigerated vehicles perform one-to-one terminal distribution, that is, fresh products
are transported from the warehouse to various residential nodes in the epidemic area. The
comparison results of the optimal values (Best.F1 and Best.F2) and the average values (Avg.
F1 and Avg. F2) of the objective function (F1 and F2) of different distribution modes are
summarized in Fig. 6. The optimal and mean values of the bi-objective function obtained by
the three modes are comparedandanalyzed. Columns“Gap(%)”presentthegapbetweenthe
ME-LRP-VD mode and other modes about the bi-objective function values is listed, which
is thus computed as Gap = 100% ×[(Bestobj − Best.2Eobj) Bestobj].
As can be seen from Fig. 6, the proposed ME-LRP-VD achieves better results than the
FVRP, FLRP, and VRP in all objective function values. Especially in the solution of the
second objective function, the advantage is more significant. Specifically, ME-LRP-VD is
significantly better than the VRP, and the obtained objective function values F1 and F2 are
reduced by 21.93% and 30.97% respectively. Compared with the FVRP, the values of F1 and
F2 obtained by ME-LRP-VD are reduced by 10.79% and 16.38% respectively. Compared
with the FLRP, we found that F1 and F2 obtained by ME-LRP-VD are reduced by 14.22%
and 23.32% respectively. This is because the warehouse set in the problem of this paper is
located in the suburbs, and residents of the epidemic area are scattered in urban areas. If
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Comparison of results in different delivery situations
fresh products are delivered directly from the warehouse to the epidemic area, the values
of the two objective functions will be too high. It demonstrates that the ME-LRP-VD with
transshipment and contactless distribution can effectively solve the distribution optimization
problem in the environment of infectious diseases. Delivery costs, transmission risks in the
delivery network, and value losses of fresh products would be effectively reduced.
As illustrated in Fig. 7, the silhouette values of the location schemes of DTSs and CDSs
are shown.Thesilhouette values of mostclusters are relatively large, but the silhouette values
of some clustering schemes are negative, which indicates that adjacent clusters are not well
separated. The average silhouette values with the number of clustering units {3, 4, 5} and
{17, 18, 19} are relatively high. Hence, the variation in silhouette values for the remaining
clusters is not depicted in Fig. 7. The higher the silhouette value, the stronger the clustering
consistency and separability, which means that spatio-temporal clustering effectively groups
demand points with similar characteristics. Certainly, we prioritize clustering schemes with
higher silhouette values, as they better indicate that the assignment relationships between
DTS, CDS, and resident nodes are more reasonable. In the subsequent path optimization
process, the corresponding travel costs or transportation time might be lower. Specifically,
regarding the DTS location scheme, the average silhouette values of the 3 clusters are higher
than those of other clustering schemes. As for the location plan of the CDSs, the average
silhouette value of the 18 clusters is the highest. The determination of the clustering scheme
makesthelocationstrategyforDTSsandCDSsclear.Wecantentativelyconcludethatamong
the 25 potential sites in the network, three potential sites are selected as DTS nodes, while
eighteen potential sites become CDS nodes. The coordinates of 3 and 18 cluster centers are
used as location references for DTSs and CDSs, respectively.
The specific location results of DTSs and CDSs are summarized in Table 4.Thereare3
DTSsand18CDSsinthelogistics network, and 4 potential sites (PS) have not been selected
for opening. Once the locations of DTS and CDS are fixed, residents are assigned to the
nearest CDS, and CDSs are assigned to the nearest DTS. For instance, refrigerated transport
vehicles deliver fresh products from the warehouse to DTS2, then CDS8, CDS10, CDS12,
CDS15, and CDS16 are served by DTS2. Both normal residents and quarantined residents
(C41, R44, C74, C76) are served by CDS2. It means that refrigerated distribution vehicles
transport fresh products to CDS2, and drones might be launched at CDS2tomeettheproduct
needs of quarantined residents (C74 and C76).
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Silhouette value of DTS and CDS cluster schemes
123
123
Table 4 Site location schemes of DTS and CDS
Site
CDS1
CDS2
CDS3
CDS4
CDS5
CDS6
CDS7
CDS8
CDS9
CDS10
CDS11
CDS12
CDS13
Node allocation plan
C3,C5,C7,C55,C98
C41,C44,C74,C76
C35,C37,C38,C40,C71,C83,C94
C39,C45,C46,C70,C72
C24,C25,C31,C32,C33,C63,C65,C67,C87
C13,C17,C20,C57,C78,C81,C90,C96
C4,C36
C10,C18,C27,C29,C53,C54,C56,C62,C82,C86
C11,C28,C30,C58,C68
C8,C15,C19
C2,C9,C48,C51,C73,C77,C79,C93,C97
C14,C16,C23,C84,C85,C92
C60,C61,C64,C66,C80,C88
Site
CDS14
CDS15
CDS16
CDS17
CDS18
DTS1
DTS2
DTS3
PS22
PS23
PS24
PS25–
Node allocation plan
C1,C34,C50,C69
C43,C47
C12,C21,C26,C52,C89,C91,C100
C6,C22,C42,C49,59,C99
C75,C95
CDS3,CDS5,CDS6,CDS9,CDS13,CDS17
CDS8,CDS10,CDS12,CDS15,CDS16
CDS1,CDS2,CDS4,CDS7,CDS11,CDS14,CDS18
Site is not selected
Site is not selected
Site is not selected
Site is not selected
Annals of Operations Research
Annals of Operations Research
5.3 Multi-echelon distribution routing analysis
Based on the above location strategies for DTSs and CDSs, the HMOM algorithm is applied
to optimize multi-echelon routes for vehicles and drones. To demonstrate the advantages
of ME-LRP-VD, we still compare it with traditional vehicle delivery (VRP), delivery with
f
ixed transit stations (FVRP), and general contactless delivery (FLRP). The specific solution
results of the objective function are shown in Fig. 8. The objective function F1 includes the
travel cost of transportation vehicles and distribution vehicles as well as the flight cost of the
drone (f1), the fixed costs of DTS and CDS (f2), the temperature control cost of two types
of vehicles (f3), and the value loss of fresh product (f4, i.e., the loss of the vehicle travel
and the drone flight). The objective function F2 contains the travel time of all vehicles and
drones (DT) and the transmission risk (RT) in the road network.
From Fig. 8, refrigerated delivery vehicles finish the delivery service for all residents’
demands (i.e., normal and quarantined residents). For the traditional way of VRP, since
the one-to-one delivery service is performed by vehicles, the cross-infection risk and vehi
cle travel time caused by the movement of delivery vehicles between nodes are both high.
Althoughtherearenodroneflightcostsandfewervehiclesmightbeused,longerroutesresult
in higher delivery costs and transmission risks. When the warehouse is located in the suburbs
and the epidemic areas are scattered in urban areas. Compared with FVRP and FLRP, the
opening of DTS and CDS and the use of drones in the ME-LRP-VD network have resulted
in an increase in the fixed costs of sites as well as travel costs and value losses during drone
f
lights. However, experimental results show that the bi-objective function value of ME-LRP
VDwith DTS and CDSs is the lowest. Therefore, the ME-LRP-VD distribution system not
only effectively reduces the total cost of the logistics distribution network, but also improves
distribution efficiency and ensures the safety of distribution.
Furthermore, the routing optimization scheme of ME-LRP-VD is shown in Table 5.A
refrigerated vehicle transports fresh products to three DTSs. Three delivery vehicles deliver
fresh products from 3 DTSs to 18 CDSs. Eventually, several drones depart from the CDS to
completethecontactlessdeliveryforquarantinedresidents,whilenormalresidentspickupthe
goods at the corresponding smart express cabinets. Under the traditional distribution mode,
warehouses need to dispatch refrigerated vehicles to carry long-distance transportation for
someresidents. But in ME-LRP-VDmode,theyareredistributed to the nearest CDS, and the
delivery needs of some quarantined residents are finished by nearby drones. The optimized
Fig. 8 Comparison of objective function values under different delivery cases
123
Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Multi-echelon optimization routes results
Transport vehicle
route
Delivery vehicle
route 1
Delivery vehicle
route 2
Delivery vehicle
route 3
Delivery
vehicle
1
Delivery
vehicle
2
Delivery
vehicle
3
Drone
1
Drone
2
Drone
3
Drone
1
Drone
2
Drone
3
Drone
1
Drone
2
Drone
3
Depot →DTS2→DTS1→DTS3→Depot
DTS1 →CDS1→CDS5→CDS7→CDS18→CDS17→CDS3→DTS1
DTS2 →CDS12→CDS13→CDS10→CDS4→CDS9→CDS8→DTS2
DTS3 →CDS2→CDS15→CDS14→CDS6→CDS11→CDS16→DTS3
CDS1 →C98→CDS5,CDS5→C63→C65→CDS7,CDS18→C75→C95
→CDS17,CDS17→C99→CDS3
CDS5 →C67→CDS7,CDS17→C71→C83→CDS3
CDS1 →C87→CDS5,CDS17→C94→CDS3
CDS12 →C84→C85→CDS13,CDS13→C66→C64→CDS10,CDS10→
C70 →CDS4,CDS9→C62→CDS8
CDS12 →C92→CDS13,CDS13→C60→C61→CDS10,CDS10→C72→
CDS4, CDS4 →C68→CDS9
CDS13 →C80→C88→CDS10,CDS9→C86→C82→CDS8
CDS2 →C74→C76→CDS15,CDS15→C69→CDS14,CDS6→C78→
C81 →CDS11,CDS11→C77→C73→CDS16
CDS6 →C90→CDS11,CDS11→C79→CDS16
CDS14 →C96→CDS6,CDS6→C93→C97→CDS11,CDS11→C100→
CDS16
route of transport vehicle 1 is Depot → DTS2 → DTS1 → DTS3 → Depot. Then, delivery
vehicle 1 transports the fresh products from DTS1 to the corresponding CDSs along theroute
DTS1→CDS1→CDS5→CDS7→CDS18→CDS17→CDS3→DTS1.C41andC44
are assigned to the smart express cabinet of ED2 to complete the pickup. Drone 1 of delivery
vehicle 1 follows the flight route CDS2 → C74 → C76 → CDS15, thus all the needs of
residents within the CDS2 service area are finished.
5.4 Sensitivity analysis and managerial insights
The corresponding value loss calculation methods for fresh products when delivered by
refrigerated vehicles and drones are different. Properly controlling the temperature inside the
refrigerated vehicle compartmentisoneoftheimportantmeanstoreducethelossrateoffresh
products.Duringthevehicletransportationfromthewarehousetothesites(i.e.,DTSorCDS),
the value loss of fresh products caused by this process is related to the target temperature
set of refrigerated vehicle’s compartment. This is because the refrigerated vehicle is able to
make temperature control adjustments while in travel. However, we use a general form of
value loss formula for calculation when the drone flies from the contactless delivery site to
the residential area. This is because the drone cannot perform temperature control during
the flight. Therefore, when we analyze the impact of fresh product value loss coefficients on
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 The impact of the coefficient αw on value loss of fresh products
Fig. 10 The impact of the coefficient ϕ on value loss of fresh products
distribution optimization solutions, two types of value loss coefficients need to be considered.
This section conducts sensitivity analysis on the value loss coefficient of fresh products in
Sect. 5.4.1. Inaddition, weusethespatio-temporaldistanceintheclusteringalgorithm,which
means we utilize an improved Euclidean distance when calculating the distance between
two nodes in the network. This undoubtedly affects the value of the objective function in
the model. Therefore, we present a sensitivity analysis on the conversion coefficient in the
distance formula in Sect. 5.4.2. The corresponding results of different coefficients are shown
in Figs. 9, 10 and 11.
5.4.1 Sensitivity analysis on the value loss coefficient
The requirements for the preservation temperature of fresh products change in real-time,
and refrigerated vehicles will set appropriate temperatures based on product characteristics
123
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 The impact of the coefficient η on the objective value
Table 6 COP, gw and αw of refrigerated vehicle under different temperature control
Temperature(°C)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
COP
gw
αw
10.92
2.4
0.4
11.42
2.3
0.5
11.96
2.2
0.6
12.55
2.1
0.7
13.19
2.0
0.8
13.90
1.9
0.9
14.68
1.8
1
15.56
1.7
1.1
16.53
1.6
1.2
and external ambient temperature. Combined with the heat change characteristics, COP is
applied to evaluate the change value of energy, i.e., COP TL (TH − TL), where COP
is the conversion ratio between energy and heat. TH represents the specific environment
temperature, and TL defines the target temperature of temperature setting. The physical
quantity that corresponds to absolute temperature is thermodynamic temperature T.The
relationship between thermodynamic temperature T and Celsius temperature t is T 273 +
t(◦C). Table 6 displays the values of COPand αw at different temperature settings.
Figure 9 shows how the coefficient αw affects the value loss of fresh products after the
vehicle is set for temperature control. We consider a scenario using 3 DTSs, 18 CDSs, and
a drone of 8 kg capacity for this sensitivity analysis. The temperature control range of fresh
products is 0°C-8°C. Under this temperature control setting, αw changes within [0.4, 1.2]
with an increment of 0.1. We can see that when αw continues to increase, the value loss of
fresh products during vehicle driving and drone flight are both on an upward trend, with the
value loss fluctuating greatly between 170 and 374. The temperature control settings of the
vehicle correspond to different value loss coefficients, and the delivery service of the drone
is later than the order of the vehicle’s visit. Therefore, αw affects the value loss of fresh
products while the vehicle is driving and will also cause certain changes in fresh products’
value loss during the drones’ subsequent flights. For fresh products in refrigerated trucks,
lower temperature environment reduces value loss but raises temperature control costs. If
the increase in temperature control costs can significantly reduce the value loss of products,
decision-makers shouldsetalower-temperaturetransportation environmentto ensurealower
αw.Otherwise,decision-makersmustcarefullybalancewhetherthebenefitsofreducingvalue
loss outweigh the additional temperature control costs incurred.
123
Annals of Operations Research
Furthermore, the value loss coefficient ϕ without temperature control is set to vary from
[0.5, 5] with an increment of 0.5, and Fig. 10 shows the specific calculation results. Different
from Fig. 9, the value loss coefficient ϕ has a less impact than αw on the value loss of the
fresh products in each part of the objective function. We can find that the total value loss
of fresh products will increase with the growth of ϕ. Since the value loss caused by vehicle
transportationisnotaffectedbythiscoefficient,thevaluelosscausedbyvehicletransportation
in the objective function is relatively stable. Given that the value loss associated with drone
delivery is directly influenced by the coefficient ϕ, the value loss also has an upward trend
if the value of ϕ increases. When ϕ gradually increases, the value loss fluctuates between
171 and 239. Furthermore, when ϕ ∈ [0.5,2.5], the increase in the loss of value is relatively
stable. It can also be observed from Fig. 10,whenϕ>2.5, the value loss of fresh products in
the network has a significantly increasing trend. For fresh products during drone delivery, a
smaller ϕ is good for reducing value loss. But decision-makers must spend more on keeping
fresh costs throughout drone flights to maintain a lower value loss factor.
5.4.2 Sensitivity analysis on the conversion coefficient
Asthe conversion coefficient for time and distance in the spatio-temporal clustering process,
it is used to ensure that indicators of different dimensions are within the same range. The
conversion coefficient η is set to vary from [0.5, 2.5] with an increment of 0.5, and Fig. 11
displays the specific results of each objective function. It can be observed that the values of
objective functions F1 and F2 gradually increase with the growth of η. The values of F1 and
F2 fluctuate between 1182 and 1834, and between 720 and 982, respectively. Increasing the
conversion coefficient η causes the values of f1, f2, f3 and f4 to rise. And it can be observed
that f 1 has the largest overall increase, while f2 has the smallest increase.
The number and locations of potential sites and customer points within the network are
known and fixed. As the η value increases, the spatio-temporal clustering algorithm places
greater emphasis on the time window factor when we obtain the location strategies of DTS
and CDS. Although the horizontal and vertical coordinates of nodes in the network remain
unchanged, the time window becomes the dominant factor during clustering. This leads to
moreremoteanddispersedcustomernodesbeingassignedtoeachclusterunit.Consequently,
all components of the objective function exhibit an upward trend. Sensitivity analysis results
indicate that decision-makers should prioritize the horizontal and vertical coordinates as
dominantfactors whenperformingspatio-temporal clustering operations. This entails setting
a low conversion coefficient η to ensure low transportation costs and high transportation
efficiency within the network.
5.5 Algorithmperformanceanalysis
Thispaperevaluatestheperformanceofdifferentalgorithmsbyusingfrequentlyutilizedmet
rics such as spacing metric (SM), mean ideal distance (MID), the number of non-dominated
points (QP), and hypervolume (HV) (Zitzler & Thiele, 1999; Farrokhi-Asl et al., 2020).
5.5.1 Small size instances
According to the improved Solomon data set, we add relevant parameters to convert into
different scale examples for algorithm performance analysis. The remaining characteristics
of the data set are shown in Sect. 5.1. Randomly create 10 groups of calculation examples of
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
Table7ComparisonresultsbetweenHMOMandε-constraintmethod
Instance Numberofresidents HMOM ε-constraintmethod
SM MID RT SM MID RT
A1-8 40 0.459 0.821 5.2 0.415 0.784 8.2
A3-7 40 0.463 0.837 5.9 0.437 0.805 9.4
A5-6 40 0.475 0.978 6.5 0.451 0.954 31.3
A7-5 40 0.491 0.991 7.3 0.485 0.972 65.1
A9-4 40 0.512 1.116 7.9 0.503 1.042 99.5
B1-12 60 0.671 1.382 12.5 0.628 1.269 50.4
B3-11 60 0.694 1.435 15.1 0.673 1.315 108.3
B5-10 60 0.708 1.464 19.8 0.680 1.357 161.9
B7-9 60 0.734 1.527 20.5 0.702 1.402 219.5
B9-8 60 0.766 1.595 18.2 0.737 1.483 260.7
Average 0.597 1.215 11.9 0.571 1.138 101.4
differentsizestosolvetheME-LRP-VDproblem.These10groupsofcalculationexamples
aredividedintotwocategories, that is, thenumberratiosofDTSandCDSare1:4and1:6
respectively.Regardingourconstructedbi-objectivemodel,theproposedHMOMalgorithm
identifiessomeParetosolutions,whereasCPLEXacquiresasolutionbyapplyingaweighted
sumapproach.Hence,weapplytheε-constraintmethodproposedbyMartínez-Salazaretal.
(2014)toobtaintheexactParetofront.Insmall-scalecalculationexamples,theeffectiveness
oftheHMOMalgorithmisverifiedbycomparingitwiththeε-constraintmethod.Inaddition,
weselectthefollowingperformanceindicatorsSM,MID,andsolutiontime(RT),andeach
setofcalculationexamplesruns10times.
AccordingtoTable7, theaverageSMandMIDobtainedbytheHMOMalgorithmare
0.597and1.215respectively,andtheaverageSMandMIDyieldedbytheε-constraintmethod
is0.571and1.138respectively.Althoughtheperformanceoftheε-constraintmethodshows
aslightadvantagewithregardtoSMandMID, intheprocessofsolvingall theexamples,
thedifferenceinthetwoindexessolvedbythetwomethodsisnotsignificant.Thesolution
timeoftheHMOMalgorithmisshorterthantheε-constraintmethod.ThemeanvalueofSM
andthemeanvalueofMIDintheHMOMalgorithmareonly0.026and0.077morethanthe
ε-constraintmethod, respectively.Furthermore,whenthenumberofresidentsincreasesto
60,weobservethattherunningtimeofbothalgorithmsincreaseswiththeincreasingproblem
size.However,thecomputationtimeoftheε-constraintmethodismuchhigherthanthatof
theHMOMalgorithm.TheHMOMobtainstheParetosolutioninnomorethan21sforall
calculationexamples.Therefore, forthesmall-scalecalculationoftheVRPD-2Eproblem,
theHMOMalgorithmhasgoodperformanceinfindingParetosolutions.
5.5.2Largesizeinstances
Next,wecomparetheHMOMalgorithmwiththeclassicalMulti-ObjectiveParticleSwarm
Optimization(MOPSO) (Coelloet al., 2004) and theoriginalNSGA-II algorithm(Deb
etal.,2002)tofurthervalidatetheeffectivenessandsuperiorityoftheHMOMalgorithmin
solvinglargerscaleproblems.Whencomparingtheresultsoftheseexamples,thebi-objective
123
Annals of Operations Research
function values F1, F2, and running time in seconds (RT) are evaluated and compared by
choosing the extreme Pareto solutions after running each set of chosen data examples ten
times. A total of 30 data sets of different sizes with the number of residents ranging from 90
to 150 are selected. For the setting of the number of residents and the number of sites in each
data set, please refer to Sect. 5.1 for details. Extensive preliminary experiments are conducted
to tune the parameters in these metaheuristics. The relevant parameter settings for HMOM
and NSGA-II are as follows: popsize 150, genmax 120, Pc 0.9, Pm 0.1. In the
MOPSO algorithm: the acceleration parameters c1 
c2 
2, both the repository capacity
and population size are set to 120, and the inertia weight ω 0.5. The computational results
of the three algorithms are summarized in Table 8.
Also, several observations are summarized from Table 7. In most problem instances (net
works from C to E), HMOM outperforms NSGA-II and MOPSO, especially in terms of
dual-objective function values. Although these solutions obtained by the metaheuristic algo
rithm are non-dominated solutions, the objective function values F1 and F2 and the average
value of the extreme solutions of all calculation examples are sufficient to prove the good
performance of HMOM. The average values of F1 and F2 yielded by HMOM are 1220 and
806 respectively. As the scale of the logistics network continues to increase, the running time
of the three algorithms increases as well. When the network has only 90 residents, none of
the algorithms takes more than 31 s, and MOPSO specifically finishes computation in less
than 15 s. However, as the residents of the whole network rise from 90 to 120, we notice
that the execution duration of all three algorithms increases significantly. HMOM does not
have the shortest runtime, and it is slower than MOPSO but faster than NSGA-II. Despite
this, MOPSOprovides the shortest execution time, which is also accompanied by the highest
bi-objective function values. Compared with the original NSGA-II, HMOM uses a shorter
running time and obtains smaller bi-objective function values.
In addition, according to the statistics analysis (P value < 0.05), it can be concluded that
the 30 sets of example data results obtained by the HMOM algorithm are more stable and
have obvious advantages. HMOM can get a better Pareto solution in a relatively short time,
which shows that HMOM is superior to the other two algorithms by solving the ME-LRP
VDproblem in the context of the epidemic. This further illustrates that the HMOM hybrid
algorithm has good search capabilities. The effectiveness of the improved strategies in the
algorithm has been verified as well.
By comparing the average values of QP, SM, and HV, as shown in Table 9,HMOM
performs better than MOPSO and NSGA-II in all cases, with corresponding values of 32,
0.34, and 0.70 respectively. The NSGA-II approach demonstrates a slight advantage over
the MOPSO algorithm. We notice that the mean values for the above three indicators in the
NSGA-II algorithm are 25, 0.46, and 0.61, respectively. Although in certain computational
instances, the number of Pareto solutions produced by HMOM and NSGA-IIisquite similar,
it is noteworthy that our HMOM with a higher number of Pareto solutions yields superior
outcomes in terms of HV and SM. In summary, compared with the other two algorithms, the
HMOMalgorithm significantly excels in these three metrics.
6 Conclusion
This paper investigates a novel truck-drone system called ME-LRP-VD for simultaneous
transshipment and delivery services. Our research is a significant extension that integrates
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
Table8ComparisonbetweenHMOMandothermetaheuristicalgorithms
Instance HMOM MOPSO NSGA-II
F1 F2 RT F1 F2 RT F1 F2 RT
C1-16 951 530 27.6 1116 586 12.4 990 580 30.5
C2-16 944 536 26.5 1120 588 12.7 993 583 30.1
C3-15 919 526 24.1 986 569 11.5 961 557 28.6
C4-15 923 520 23.7 987 572 12.2 966 551 28.9
C5-14 909 508 22.5 961 555 10.5 924 531 26.4
C6-14 900 505 22.8 965 560 10.8 928 536 26.5
C7-13 953 547 24.9 991 605 11.7 961 580 27.5
C8-13 956 545 24.3 998 609 12.4 965 586 27.9
C9-12 975 589 21.0 1135 662 12.7 1064 632 25.3
C10-12 980 592 21.6 1126 670 13.4 1054 635 25.1
D1-20 1135 699 30.2 1264 764 22.3 1238 751 35.1
D2-20 1141 705 30.9 1267 768 21.9 1230 753 36.1
D3-18 1108 722 34.8 1235 795 20.3 1195 760 38.2
D4-18 1105 732 33.5 1239 791 20.5 1192 765 38.8
D5-16 1178 787 34.1 1268 851 21.6 1225 832 39.2
D6-16 1181 790 33.7 1279 858 20.7 1229 839 40.3
D7-14 1226 805 35.8 1311 891 22.9 1271 865 41.7
D8-14 1231 802 34.6 1305 893 22.3 1280 863 41.2
D9-12 1203 829 32.4 1286 915 21.5 1250 890 38.4
D10-12 1208 839 32.7 1292 905 21.8 1255 893 37.9
E1-26 1492 1005 49.2 1587 1092 36.9 1558 1062 61.5
E2-26 1494 1017 50.8 1590 1099 36.8 1556 1060 62.5
E3-24 1551 1079 47.3 1638 1155 33.5 1593 1126 58.9
E4-24 1554 1083 48.1 1634 1151 33.2 1598 1128 59.2
E5-22 1583 1137 50.2 1698 1206 36.6 1659 1183 62.7
E6-22 1591 1140 49.6 1694 1216 37.1 1650 1180 63.4
E7-18 1577 1173 48.4 1642 1255 34.4 1616 1227 60.1
E8-18 1571 1162 49.0 1644 1247 35.3 1620 1230 59.9
E9-16 1529 1146 52.5 1605 1229 37.8 1583 1187 63.2
E10-16 1522 1142 51.7 1603 1219 38.5 1587 1186 63.6
Avg 1220 806 35.6 1315 876 23.2 1273 852 42.6
P-value 2.8E-15 1.9E-23– 1.6E-13 5.7E-21
themulti-echelonlocation-routingproblemandvehicle-droneroutingproblemthatsimulta
neouslyconsiderstheenergyconsumptionofdrones, theimpactofepidemicspreadrisks,
andthecollaborationofheterogeneousvehiclesandhomogeneousdrones.Amathemati
calformulationintheformofamixedintegerprogramisconstructedwhichsolvesforthe
locationofDTSandCDSnodesandtheoptimalvehicleanddroneroutestoservevarious
epidemicareassuchthattotaleconomiccost,thetotaltraveltime,andthetransmissionrisk
123
AnnalsofOperationsResearch
Table9Comparisonresultsofcomprehensiveindicatorsinlargeproblems
Instance HMOM MOPSO NSGA-II
QP SM HV QP SM HV QP SM HV
C1-18 25 0.42 0.56 15 0.73 0.22 18 0.58 0.43
C3-12 20 0.48 0.58 14 0.70 0.26 16 0.55 0.40
C5-11 19 0.36 0.45 12 0.75 0.30 15 0.59 0.38
C7-10 28 0.40 0.49 10 0.64 0.35 21 0.51 0.39
C9-9 26 0.37 0.60 17 0.55 0.33 20 0.43 0.45
D1-18 35 0.33 0.59 19 0.53 0.41 25 0.49 0.51
D3-16 39 0.27 0.65 20 0.78 0.45 27 0.59 0.62
D5-14 31 0.38 0.67 15 0.62 0.49 28 0.46 0.55
D7-12 29 0.34 0.62 22 0.55 0.40 24 0.42 0.57
D9-10 34 0.35 0.71 18 0.54 0.42 19 0.52 0.48
E1-20 42 0.29 0.73 24 0.49 0.55 33 0.38 0.62
E3-18 41 0.35 0.68 30 0.48 0.49 36 0.35 0.68
E5-16 36 0.24 0.75 25 0.50 0.55 30 0.39 0.65
E7-14 37 0.29 0.81 29 0.42 0.58 31 0.38 0.72
E9-12 38 0.23 0.79 21 0.45 0.51 35 0.33 0.68
Avg 32 0.34 0.70 19 0.58 0.49 25 0.46 0.61
areminimizedrespectively.Giventhecomplexityoftheproblem,anovelHMOMalgorithm
thatcombines thebi-levelclusteringandtheCOMEAispresentedtosolvethisproblem.
Tovalidatetheperformanceofthesolutionapproach,extensivetestprobleminstancesand
real-worldprobleminstancesaregeneratedindifferentscales,ourproposedalgorithmcan
yieldhigh-qualitysolutionsinareasonabletimeincomparisonwithothermulti-objective
solvingmethods.Theoptimizationresultsofareal-worldcaseinChongqingdemonstrate
thattheobjectivefunctionachievesitsminimumvaluewhenthelogisticsnetworkcomprises
3DTSsand18CDSs.Theeffectsofkeyparametersontheproblemareevaluatedtopro
videsomemanagerial implications:Decision-makersshouldcarefullybalancewhetherthe
benefitsofreducingvaluelossoutweightheadditional temperaturecontrolcostsincurred;
Anddecision-makersshouldprioritizethehorizontalandverticalcoordinatesasdominant
factorswhenperformingspatio-temporalclusteringoperations.
Infuturestudies,onecouldconsidercollaborativepickupanddeliveryofvehicle-drone,
namely,vehicle-dronejointlyperformspickupanddeliveryservicesinthelocation-routing
problembutwouldcertainlyleadtomorecomplexity.Anothermorepracticalchangewould
betoaddmultipletypesofproductdemands,eachwithadifferent rateofqualitydecay.
Eachcustomerhasmultipleproductsdeliveredbythesameordifferentvehiclesordrones,
resultinginvariedroutedecisions.Therelatedinputinthispaperisdeterministicwhilesome
elements(e.g.,productdemandandtraveltime,etc.)maybeuncertaininpractice.Because
ofthesedynamicfactors,thisleadstoasignificantincreaseinthecomplexityoftheproblem.
Acknowledgements ThisresearchwassupportedbytheNationalNaturalScienceFoundationofChina(No.
72471199,72071161,72401241),ChongqingMunicipalEducationCommissionScienceandTechnology
ResearchPlanProject (No.KJQN202500705), theFundamentalResearchCultivationProject ofCentral
UniversitiesBasicBusinessFees(No.XJ2023000301), thePhilosophyandSocialSciencesFoundationof
SichuanProvince(No.SCJJ23ND191,SCJJ24ND308).
123
Annals of Operations Research
References
Abbassi, A., Kharraja, S., Alaoui, A. E., Boukachour, J., & Paras, D. (2021). Multi-objective two-echelon
location-distribution of non-medical products. International Journal of Production Research, 59(17),
5284–5300.
Acevedo-Chedid,J.,Soto,M.C.,Ospina-Mateus,H.,Salas-Navarro,K.,&Sana,S.S.(2023).Anoptimization
model for routing-location of vehicles with time windows and cross-docking structures in a sustainable
supply chain of perishable foods. Operations Management Research, 16(4), 1742–1765.
Ahmadi-Javid, A., Mansourfar, M., Lee, C. G., & Liu, L. (2023). Optimal distribution of perishable foods with
storage temperature control and quality requirements: An integrated vehicle routing problem. Computers
&Industrial Engineering, 182, Article 109215.
Albrecht, W., & Steinrücke, M. (2018). Coordinating continuous-time distribution and sales planning of
perishable goods with quality grades. International Journal of Production Research, 56(7), 2646–2665.
Alvarez, A., Cordeau, J. F., Jans, R., Munari, P., & Morabito, R. (2020). Formulations, branch-and-cut and a
hybrid heuristic algorithm for an inventory routing problem with perishable products. European Journal
of Operational Research, 283(2), 511–529.
Bala, K., Brcanov, D., &Gvozdenovic,N.(2017).Two-echelonlocationroutingsynchronizedwithproduction
schedules and time windows. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 25(3), 525–543.
Bortolini, M., Faccio, M., Ferrari, E., Gamberi, M., & Pilati, F. (2016). Fresh food sustainable distribution:
Cost, delivery time and carbon footprint three-objective optimization. Journal of Food Engineering, 174,
56–67.
Boysen,N.,Briskorn,D.,Fedtke,S.,&Schwerdfeger,S.(2018).Dronedeliveryfromtrucks:Dronescheduling
for given truck routes. Networks, 72(4), 506–527.
Cai, X. Q., & Zhou, X. (2014). Optimal policies for perishable products when transportation to export market
is disrupted. Production and Operations Management, 23(5), 907–923.
Carlsson, J. G., & Song, S. (2018). Coordinated logistics with a truck and a drone. Management Science,
64(9), 4052–4069.
Chan, F. T. S., Wang, Z. X., Goswami, A., Singhania, A., & Tiwari, M. K. (2020). Multi-objective particle
swarm optimisation based integrated production inventory routing planning for efficient perishable food
logistics operations. International Journal of Production Research, 58(17), 5155–5174.
Chang, Y. S., & Lee, H. J. (2018). Optimal delivery routing with wider drone-delivery areas along a shorter
truck-route. Expert Systems with Applications, 104, 307–317.
Chauhan, D., Unnikrishnan, A., & Figliozzi, M. (2019). Maximum coverage capacitated facility location
problem with range constrained drones. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 99,
1–18.
Chen, S.Y., (2020). The new economy under the epidemic: fresh food ecommerce has challenges, and the
spring of drone delivery is not far away. (Accessed March 2023) http://finance.sina.com.cn/chanjing/
cyxw/2020-02-12/doc-iimxxstf0718772.shtml.
Chen, C., Tian, Z. H., & Yao, B. Z. (2019). Optimization of two-stage location-routing-inventory problem
with time-windows in food distribution network. Annals of Operations Research, 273(1–2), 111–134.
Chen,J.,Dong,M.,&Xu,L.(2018).Aperishableproductshipmentconsolidationmodelconsideringfreshness
keeping effort. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 115, 56–86.
Chen, X. Q., Jiu, Y., & Hu, D. W. (2024). Two-echelon location-routing problem of perishable products
based onthe integrated mode of in-store pick-up and delivery. Transportation Research Record, 2678(8),
622–636.
Chung,S.H.,Sah,B.,&Lee,J.(2020).Optimizationfordroneanddrone-truckcombinedoperations:Areview
of the state of the art and future directions. Computers & Operations Research, 123, Article 105004.
Cnr.cn, (2020). Under the epidemic, “online food grabbing” is booming, and fresh food e-commerce is facing
a big test. (Accessed October 2025) https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1659851011077405901&wfr=sp
ider&for=pc.
Coello, C. A. C., Pulido, G. T., & Lechuga, M. S. (2004). Handling multiple objectives with particle swarm
optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 8(3), 256–279.
Cuda, R., Guastaroba, G., & Speranza, M. G. (2015). A survey on two-echelon routing problems. Computers
&Operations Research, 55(3), 185–199.
Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., & Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm:
NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6(2), 182–197.
Dell’Amico, M., Montemanni, R., & Novellani, S. (2020). Matheuristic algorithms for the parallel drone
scheduling traveling salesman problem. Annals of Operations Research, 289(2), 211–226.
Deng, F. H., Qin, H., Li, J. L., & Cheng, C. (2023). The pickup and delivery problem with time windows and
incompatibility constraints in cold chain transportation. Transportation Science, 57(2), 444–462.
123
Annals of Operations Research
Devapriya, P., Ferrell, W., & Geismar, N. (2017). Integrated production and distribution scheduling with a
perishable product. European Journal of Operational Research, 259(3), 906–916.
Drexl, M., & Schneider, M. (2015). A survey of variants and extensions of the location-routing problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 241(2), 283–308.
Dukkanci, O., Campbell, J., & Kara, B. (2024). Facility location decisions for drone delivery with riding: A
literature review. Computers & Operations Research, 167, Article 106672.
Esmizadeh, Y., Bashiri, M., Jahani, H., & Almada-Lobo, B. (2021). Cold chain management in hierarchical
operational hub networks. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 147,
Article 102202.
Faiz, T. I., Vogiatzis, C., & Noor-E-Alam, M. (2024). Computational approaches for solving two-echelon
vehicle and UAVrouting problems for post-disaster humanitarian operations. Expert Systems with Appli
cations, 237, Article 121473.
Farrokhi-Asl, H., Makui, A., Jabbarzadeh, A., & Barzinpour, F. (2020). Solving a multi-objective sustainable
waste collection problem considering a new collection network. Operational Research, 20, 1977–2015.
Golestani, M., Moosavirad, S. H., Asadi, Y., & Biglari, S. (2021). A multi-objective green hub location
problem with multi item-multi temperature joint distribution for perishable products in cold supply
chain. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 27, 1183–1194.
Govindan, K., Jafarian, A., Khodaverdi, R., & Devika, K. (2014). Two-echelon multiple-vehicle location
routing problem with time windows for optimization of sustainable supply chain network of perishable
food. International Journal of Production Economics, 152, 9–28.
Ham, A. M. (2018). Integrated scheduling of m-truck, m-drone, and m-depot constrained by time-window,
drop-pickup, and m-visit using constraint programming. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 91, 1–14.
Hashemi-Amiri, O., Ghorbani, F., & Ji, R. (2023). Integrated supplier selection, scheduling, and routing
problemforperishable product supply chain: Adistributionally robust approach. Computers &Industrial
Engineering, 175, Article 108845.
Hosseini, S. M. H., Behroozi, F., & Sana, S. S. (2023). Multi-objective optimization model for blood sup
ply chain network design considering cost of shortage and substitution in disaster. RAIRO-Operations
Research, 57(1), 59–85.
Jiang, Y., Lai, P. L., Yang, C. C., & Wang, X. C. (2023). Exploring the factors that drive consumers to use
contactless delivery services in the context of the continued COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Retailing
and Consumer Services, 72, Article 103276.
Karak, A., & Abdelghany, K. (2019). The hybrid vehicle-drone routing problem for pick-up and delivery
services. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 102, 427–449.
Keizer, M.,Akkerman,R.,Grunow,M.,Bloemhof,J.M.,Haijema,R.,&Vorst,J.G.A.J.(2017).Logisticsnet
workdesign for perishable products with heterogeneous quality decay. European Journal of Operational
Research, 262(2), 535–549.
Kim, D., Lee, K., &Moon,I.(2019). Stochastic facility location model for drones considering uncertain flight
distance. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 1283–1302.
Kim, J. J., Kim, I., & Hwang, J. (2021). A change of perceived innovativeness for contactless food delivery
services using dronesafter theoutbreakofCOVID-19.InternationalJournalofHospitalityManagement,
93, Article 102758.
Lan, Y. L., Liu, F. G., & Huang, Z. X. (2022). Two-echelon dispatching problem with mobile satellites in city
logistics. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(1), 84–96.
Leng, L., Zhang, J., Zhang, C., Zhao, Y., Wang, W., & Li, G. (2020). Decomposition-based hyperheuristic
approaches for the bi-objective cold chain considering environmental effects. Computers & Operations
Research, 123, Article 105043.
Lian, K., Milburn, A. B., & Rardin, R. L. (2016). An improved multi-directional local search algorithm for
the multi-objective consistent vehicle routing problem. IIE Transactions, 48(10), 975–992.
Liang, X., Wang, N., Zhang, M., & Jiang, B. (2023). Bi-objective multi-period vehicle routing for perishable
goodsdeliveryconsideringcustomersatisfaction.ExpertSystemswithApplications,220,Article119712.
Liang, Y., Liu, F., Lim, A., & Zhang, D. (2020). An integrated route, temperature and humidity planning
problem for the distribution of perishable products. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 147, Article
106623.
Liu, A. J., Zhu, Q. Y., & Xu, L. (2021). Sustainable supply chain management for perishable products in
emerging markets: An integrated location-inventory-routing model. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 150, Article 102319.
Macrina, G., Pugliese, L. D., Guerriero, F., & Laporte, G. (2020). Drone-aided routing: A literature review.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 120, Article 102762.
123
Annals of Operations Research
Mahapatra, D.R.,Panda,S., &Sana,S.S.(2020).Multi-choiceandstochastic programmingfortransportation
probleminvolvedinsupplyoffoodsandmedicinestohospitalswithconsiderationoflogisticdistribution.
RAIRO-Operations Research, 54(4), 1119–1132.
Martínez-Salazar, I. A., Molina, J., Ángel-Bello, F., Gómez, T., & Caballero, R. (2014). Solving a bi-objective
transportation location routing problem by metaheuristic algorithms. European Journal of Operational
Research, 234(1), 25–36.
Mei, J. (2022). Nanjing: All residential communities implement strict access control measures! Delivery
personnel and takeout services are prohibited from entering residential areas. (Accessed October 2025)
https://www.nbd.com.cn/rss/toutiao/articles/1854516.html.
Meng, S. S., Chen, Y. R., & Li, D. (2024). The multi-visit drone-assisted pickup and delivery problem with
time windows. European Journal of Operational Research, 314(2), 685–702.
Mogale, D. G., Kumar, S. K., & Tiwari, M. K. (2020). Green food supply chain design considering risk and
post-harvest losses: A case study. Annals Operations Research, 295(1), 257–284.
Moshref-Javadi, M., Lee, S., & Winkenbach, M. (2020). Design and evaluation of a multi-trip delivery model
withtruckanddrones.TransportationResearchPartE:LogisticsandTransportationReview,136,Article
101887.
Murray, C. C., & Chu, A. G. (2015). The flying sidekick traveling salesman problem: Optimization of drone
assisted parcel delivery. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 54, 86–109.
Neves-Moreira, F., Almada-Lobo, B., Cordeau, J. F., Guimaraes, L., & Jans, R. (2019). Solving a large multi
product production-routing problem with delivery time windows. Omega, 86, 154–172.
Osvald, A., & Stirn, L. Z. (2008). A vehicle routing algorithm for the distribution of fresh vegetables and
similar perishable food. Journal of Food Engineering, 85(2), 285–295.
Pina-Pardo, J. C., Silva, D. F., & Smith, A. E. (2021). The traveling salesman problem with release dates and
drone resupply. Computers & Operations Research, 129, Article 105170.
Rahmanifar, G., Mohammadi, M., Golabian, M., Sherafat, A., Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M., Fusco, G., & Colom
baroni, C. (2024). Integrated location and routing for cold chain logistics networks with heterogeneous
customer demand. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 38, Article 100573.
Roberti, R., & Ruthmair, M. (2021). Exact methods for the traveling salesman problem with drone. Trans
portation Science, 55(2), 315–335.
Rohaninejad, M., Sahraeian, R., & Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. (2018). An accelerated Benders decomposition
algorithm for reliable facility location problems in multi-echelon networks. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 124, 523–534.
Solomon, M. (1987). Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time window con
straints. Operations Research, 35(2), 254–265.
Struyf,A.,Mia,H.,&Rousseeuw,P.(1997).Clusteringinanobject-orientedenvironment.JournalofStatistical
Software, 01(04), 1–30.
Tadaros, M., Sifaleras, A., & Migdalas, A. (2024). A variable neighborhood search approach for solving a
real-world hierarchical multi-echelon vehicle routing problem involving HCT vehicles. Computers &
Operations Research, 165, Article 106594.
Wang, M.H. (2025). Reshaping the “last mile” of express logistics. (Accessed October 2025) https://www.
drc.gov.cn/DocView.aspx?chnid=379&leafid=1338&docid=2908760.
Wu, F., & Dong, M. (2023). Eco-routing problem for the delivery of perishable products. Computers &
Operations Research, 154, Article 106198.
Yu, D. Z., Tang, S. Y., & Niederhoff, J. (2011). On the benefits of operational flexibility in a distribution
network with transshipment. Omega, 39(3), 350–361.
Zhou, Y. F., Liu, C. S., & Xu, Q. (2023). Time-dependent green location-routing problem under carbon cap
and-trade policy. Transportation Research Record, 2677(5), 1135–1150.
Zitzler, E., & Thiele, L. (1999). Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: A comparative case study and the
strength Pareto approach. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 3(4), 257–271.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable
law.
123