Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-07008-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Sustainable reverse logistics in e-commerce: a 
comprehensive literature review with challenges and 
research opportunities
Anurag Mishra1 · Pankaj Dutta1
Received: 6 June 2022 / Accepted: 17 December 2025
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2026
Abstract
An exponential increase in demand fulfillment through the e-commerce platform has forced 
many firms to switch to digital channels from traditional brick-and-mortar systems. With 
increased demand from online websites, issues about Return Management (RM), Reverse 
Logistics (RL), packaging wastes, disposition, and alternate use of wastes have become 
an area of concern. A well-developed RL network through the practices of effective return 
handling, reuse, and recycling could address these issues and help minimize wastage, 
thereby creating a sustainable environment. A systematic literature review is conducted, 
and 240 papers were reviewed and analyzed pertaining to RM and RL domains of online 
markets. The findings reveal that the research on e-commerce focusing on returns and RL 
practices for sustainable development is in the growth stage. Several aspects and features 
of reverse supply chains, like return policy, return handling process, return costs, and RL 
network design, have been investigated using different qualitative and quantitative meth
odologies and theoretical foundations. Further, the RL network design is segregated into 
food, apparel, and packaging waste sections. The basis is that these product types require 
different treatments due to varying shelf life, packaging, and responsiveness. The study 
aims to draw the research gap and bring out challenges and opportunities in the sustainable 
RL domain of e-commerce faced by academics and industries. The study’s findings will 
help the practitioners understand the key areas to focus on for designing an efficient and 
sustainable RL system and the vital areas to focus on while developing the return process.
Keywords e-commerce · Reverse logistics · Return management · Packaging waste · 
Sustainability · Literature review
Pankaj Dutta
pdutta@iitb.ac.in
Anurag Mishra
anuragkrmishra22@gmail.com
1
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
The recent surge in customer demands from customers who prefer buying from digital plat
forms has made businesses switch from traditional to online forms. It has led to the formi
dable growth of e-commerce. Today’s e-commerce has revolutionized market dynamics, 
compelling traditional businesses to trim profits. Hypermarkets and supermarkets are adapt
ing by launching online delivery services (Ni & Liao, 2009). The online business model 
leans on technology-driven information sharing, influencing goods’ movement and distri
bution strategies, and overcoming last-mile delivery hurdles to foster sustainable growth 
within firms (Fleischmann, 2000; Yasin et al., 2014).
Apart from changing consumers’ ideas and ways of consumption, e-commerce also 
reduces transactional costs and adds new value (Guojing & Ciping, 2010). The progress 
made in payment channels, logistics services, internet penetration, and globalization has 
even led to cross-border e-commerce (Wei & Dong, 2019). With the effect of geographical 
location holding less significance for online orders than offline ones (Lendle et al., 2016), 
both purchases and returns will increase in the future. However, longer delivery lead time 
and expensive postal stumpage are issues that still need to be addressed for cross-border 
e-commerce (Wang et al., 2020).
The pillars of e-commerce are Speed of delivery (Gabe, 2009), Inventory Leverage 
(Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020), Support Services, and communication (Gabe, 2009; Mazum
dar & Elliott, 2020; Ni & Liao, 2009; Pratap et al., 2021; Yu & Ni, 2013), Product selection 
and Pricing (Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020; Yu & Ni, 2013), Information and Data (Gabe, 
2009; Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020; Yu & Ni, 2013), and Trust (Gabe, 2009) as it is depicted 
in Fig. 1. The E-commerce pillars play a vital role in carrying and sustaining the business 
forward. Among the pillars mentioned above, Speed of delivery is the time taken to deliver 
an order once the order is made. The new paradigms that have become a part of this are the 
same delivery and next-day delivery (Ding & Jin, 2019; Nogueira et al., 2022). However, 
this leads to increased costs (Zhang & Song, 2016). Inventory leverage is the optimization 
of inventory costs by forecasting more precise demand and avoiding the stock–out scenario 
(Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020). Services and communication include logistics, payment meth
ods, security enablement, and customer service availability (Gabe, 2009; Yu & Ni, 2013). 
Product selection and Pricing include the variety of products offered with minimum inven
tory and warehouse costs. Pricing determines the optimal price by considering the costs of 
the digital channel (Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020). Information and data are the most promi
nent tools for e-commerce firms, and machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques 
can be used to anticipate buying patterns, return behavior, fraud detection, and optimize 
inventory. Also, the AI-enabled product recommendation to the customers has proved to be 
a satisfactory conversion uplift (Gabe, 2009; Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020; Yu & Ni, 2013). 
Trust is one thing that helps in customer acquisition and retention (Gabe, 2009; Titiyal et 
al., 2020), and assurance to the customers that their security and privacy are given utmost 
importance will help reap the firms’ revenue (Gabe, 2009; Mazumdar & Elliott, 2020).
Though e-commerce is often considered an activity to deliver end goods to the cus
tomers, it comprises many other vital activities that help form the backbone for customer 
retention, where RM and RL play. Having a well-managed RM could reduce the high cost 
of the industry. The academic research on product returns, though, initially dates back to 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 The Pillars of E-commerce
Heal (1977), and online returns have started gaining attention recently (Abdulla et al., 2019; 
Janakiraman et al., 2016).
RL is an important aspect of the RM process. RL is defined as "The process of plan
ning, implementing, and controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow of raw materials, in
process inventory, finished goods, and related information from the point of consumption 
to the point of origin for the purpose of recapturing value or proper disposal" (Rogers & 
Tibben-Lembke, 2001). Several essential aspects like returns, undelivered, damaged goods, 
the company shipping the wrong product or size, delay in delivery, and exchanges make RL 
an indispensable part of e-commerce.
There is a growing increase in waste, such as electronic, plastic, food, packaging, textile, 
and various other types of waste. Also, the return costs have seen a significant increase 
(Cullinane et al., 2019). The need for an RL Channel has become more relevant as it deals 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
with the collection, inspection, and proper treatment of the used products. The role of 
RL here is not just to reduce the economic strain on a company but also to reduce the 
adverse environmental effects caused by the improper treatment of waste. Thus, bringing 
RL and e-commerce together as one entity is essentially required for waste reduction by 
reuse and recycling, proper waste utilization, and reduction in environmental losses. RL of 
e-commerce is the return, counterflow, or reverse flow of products ordered on the Internet 
from customers to suppliers (Yan, 2005). The products are generally returned for reasons 
of poor quality, the wrong item received, the difference in the look of the product received 
from what was ordered, or other factors of customer dissatisfaction (Rajasekaran & Priya
darshini, 2021).
The challenges in setting up an RL network are mainly the high investment and higher 
uncertainty about the return of goods. Investors bear a high risk when making decisions in 
the design phase of reverse production (Alshamsi & Diabat, 2015). Hence, the process of 
setting up RL was initially slow but is now picking up due to government legislation, more 
awareness, and a higher number of return goods.
Our goal is to analyze RM and RL processes specific to online firms—the features and 
characteristics that affect returns and the impact of return management policies influencing 
customer service and satisfaction. The study further focuses on the vital decision elements 
of the RL and the significant attributes affecting the logistics and network structure.
The paper highlights the relevant literature on RM and Reverse Logistics network design 
(RLND) based on e-commerce firms to investigate these issues. The research gap in differ
ent product types has been identified. The current problems and challenges in the RM and 
RL network are analyzed. The challenges lie in having a more efficient RM system with a 
robust RL network. Further, the study highlights the challenges, opportunities, and research 
gaps that academicians and practitioners could find helpful.
Efficient RM of online markets is the need of the hour. RL is an essential component of 
RM; though RL practices for different products have been in research for quite some time, 
the processes have been discussed in depth through various literature. The RL network 
design research has been extensively done for electronic products, wood, automobiles, spare 
parts, plastic bottles, and home appliances, but it’s missing for e-commerce products.
The study analyzes relevant literature covering RM returns and their policies and impli
cations. Then, classify RM’s essential component, i.e., RL network design, based on prod
uct types for different e-commerce firms and packaging wastes. The research for RL in 
e-commerce is of urgent importance since most customers from developing countries are 
moving to buy more from the e-commerce firms, impacting the environment and creating 
more waste added with additional packaging wastes. Therefore, reviewing the substantial 
work done in this area and identifying the challenges and opportunities being addressed in 
the upcoming research is essential. The study will look into the following aspects.
● RQ1: How does an e-commerce RL network differ from a traditional RL network with 
complexities related to the sustainable network design?
This has been answered by explaining the different characteristics and requirements in 
the specific network designs for e-commerce RL pertaining to the practices of effective 
return handling, reuse, and recycling.
● RQ2: How has the past literature pertaining to RM and RL evolved? Also, how can the 
past literature be studied to provide macroscopic and microscopic insights on RL in e
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
commerce?
For this, over 240 articles were inspected and followed by descriptive analysis. The 
research quantified the growth and productivity of research topics, which could interest 
the scientists, industrial and institutional arrangements, and their activities. To the best 
of our knowledge, no state-of-the-art review covers the RM and RL for online markets. 
The thematic study covered the specific problems of Inventory, Facility location, rout
ing, barriers and drivers, strategic issues, and waste management.
● RQ3: The RM specific to online markets and how it impacts customer loyalty and sat
isfaction?
For this, we studied the journals and articles specific to the RM and its varied character
istics and explained them in detail in the following sections.
● RQ4: How do the networking and other optimization problems for e-commerce differ 
for different products and specific needs in the network design?
Through thorough material evaluation and critical analysis of the journals, the RL net
work was classified as (1) an e-commerce network, (2) Food, (3) Apparel, and (4) pack
aging. Every network type was analyzed and discussed individually in Sect. 3 and 4. 
Several other figures and diagrams highlighted the different problems, challenges, and 
future research.
The RM for e-commerce is a recent area of exploration by the research community, so this 
paper makes an effort to bring together the research carried out in the area, categorize them 
as per products and look for further challenges and opportunities in the area. The remainder 
of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 revises the literature on RLND. Section 3 
discusses the RM and RL models in the e-commerce domain differentiating product-wise; 
Sect. 4 provides the opportunities and further scope of research. Section 5 concludes with 
crucial outcomes and further future work.
2 Methodology
The literature review for RM in e-commerce was missing; hence, this is the first attempt at 
writing a comprehensive literature review. Review writing is a review of relevant literature 
that becomes necessary for theory development and to find areas where research is needed 
(Meredith, 1993; Webster & Watson, 2002). The research methodology steps will be the 
material collection, descriptive analysis, category selection, and material evaluation. We 
adopted the methodology proposed by Mayring (2010) for the structuring of the review of 
the literature.
2.1 Material collection
We began our search by searching Google Scholar and Scopus databases. All the resources 
were published in the relevant field of RL for e-commerce. The search is briefly described 
in Fig. 2. The area is relatively new and hence has not been limited to the search to any 
particular frame. It has covered all the relevant journals and conference papers dated till 
May of 2024. The keywords for our search included Reverse Logistics and e-commerce, 
Reverse Logistics and Food e-commerce, Reverse Logistics and Apparel/Clothing/Gar
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Material searching and screening
ments e-commerce, Reverse Logistics and packaging /packaging waste, Returns Manage
ment and e-commerce, online product returns Omni-channel, online return policy, and other 
variations.
Further, the search results were filtered based on relevance, English for language. After 
reading and analyzing the articles by keywords and abstract, only those were retained, 
matching our theme of Return Management and Reverse Logistics in E-commerce. Finally, 
240 articles were selected, reviewed, and analyzed in detail.
2.2 Descriptive analysis
To understand the better perspectives and evaluate our analysis, the articles selected were 
from reputed journals like the Journal of Operations Management, Transportation Part E, 
Journal of Cleaner Production, International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logis
tics Management, Resource, Conservation and Recycling, European Journal of Operational 
Research, International Journal of Production Research, International Journal of Production 
Economics. The publication in the abovementioned area has been gaining attention lately, 
and the trend is increasing. Figure 3a describes the year-wise distribution of the articles 
published, which shows a growing trend from 2014 onwards. Figure 3b shows that the 
published journals have used modeling and empirical methods more in the research than the 
case study or multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) techniques.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 a E-tail product returns article distribution year-wise b Research methodology trends in online 
product returns
2.3 Category selection
As discussed above in Sect. 1, the literature on RM and RL in e-commerce are divided into 
these five categories: (1) RM, (2) RL network, (3) Food network, (4) Apparels, and (5) 
Packaging waste. The articles were a mixed bag of empirical studies, optimization prob
lems, Barriers and drivers, packaging waste management. This classification and the frame
work of the study are depicted in Fig. 4.
2.4 Material evaluation
The analysis and segregation of the papers helped us classify the papers into relevant catego
ries. The articles’ evaluation helped identify the essential issues and challenges in the theme 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Framework for the study
literature review. The future research directions and research gaps were derived from the 
critical study of the literature. The validity and reliability of the research are drawn through 
discussion of built constructs with peer research colleagues and authors using deductive and 
inductive approaches.
3 Literature review
3.1 Reverse logistics network design
Public awareness initially led to the interest in RL and CLSC (Dowlatshahi, 2000), followed 
by government legislation. Fleischmann et al. (1997) carried out one of the first studies 
where they elaborated different models that were present then and gave a basic framework 
for reverse logistics networks. RL network design for remanufacturing was discussed by 
(Fleischmann et al., 2000, 2004), detailing how the product from the end customer reaches 
the remanufacturing center.
Technological development, mass consumption, and decreased product life span have 
augmented production worldwide. Consequently, more raw materials are extracted, creat
ing more waste (Van Wassenhove & Besiou, 2013). RL are primarily grouped into four 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
types: one in which the reverse network enterprise is set by themselves (Govindan et al., 
2012; Huang & Yang, 2014; Kara et al., 2007), then where it is outsourced to a third party 
(Agrawal & Singh, 2021; Govindan et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012); a closed-loop network 
integrating the forward logistics and RL (Das & Chowdhury, 2012; Das & Dutta, 2015; 
Dutta et al., 2016; Shi et al., 2015) and lastly is the construction of an enterprise for RL 
jointly be related business enterprises (Luo et al., 2012). RL encompasses the activities from 
used products not required by the user to products that are again usable in the market and 
gives revenue opportunities to the manufacturers (Guide & Van Wassenhove, 2009).
The optimization of RL network design (Alshamsi & Diabat, 2015; Bing et al., 2014; 
Diabat et al., 2013; Galvez et al., 2015; Roghanian & Pazhoheshfar, 2014;) has been taken 
in subsequent studies with certain modifications. Also, several other specific problems 
mainly related to operations Management in RL have been taken up by authors like design 
and planning (Alumur et al., 2012; Chaabane et al., 2012; Zhuan & Xiuquan, 2013), price 
and revenue models (Hong & Yeh, 2012; Qiang et al., 2013) production planning and inven
tory problem (Niknejad & Petrovic, 2014), transportation problem (Yadegari et al., 2015), 
remanufacturing (Millet, 2011; Pishvaee et al., 2009), recycling (Ferri et al., 2015; Kilic et 
al., 2015; Lee & Dong, 2008; Subulan et al., 2015), forecasting return demands (Benedito 
& Corominas, 2013; Krappe et al., 2013a; 2013b), Reuse (Xie et al., 2013; Zikopoulos & 
Tagaras, 2007).
Though Literature reviews on the area of RL have been done by previous researchers 
at various spaces of time with varying themes for which a detailed analysis is tabulated in 
Table 1. Fleischmann et al., 1997 did the first review analysis on RL. Carter & Ellram, 1998 
covered the environmental aspects of packaging, transportation, and purchasing. Bras & 
McIntosh, 1999 did a brief review specific to the remanufacturing sector. Guide et al. (1999) 
and Guide (2000) did a review study on Production planning and control for remanufactur
ing. Meade et al. (2007) reviewed the RL topic, covering the research opportunities and 
challenges. Sasikumar & Kannan (2008a, 2008b), in their subsequent reviews, have taken 
up inventory management along with product recovery and reverse distribution. Rubio et 
al. (2008) analyzed the techniques and methodology used in the research of RL. Pokharel & 
Mutha (2009) and Sasikumar & Kannan (2009), in their reviews, covered the entire area of 
RL till the year 2008, while Sheriff et al. (2012) covered the research done till 2011. Closed 
Loop supply chain (CLSC) and RL together as a single subject was reviewed by Ilgin & 
Gupta (2010) in the relevant research carried out till 2009; Akcali & Cetinkaya (2011) 
reviewed the inventory and production planning quantitative models in CLSC. Govindan 
et al. (2015), in their exhaustive and comprehensive study of RL and CLSC, reviewed 382 
relevant articles. Campos et al. (2017) did a review study of RL at the End of life and End 
of the pharmaceutical industry’s use. Govindan & Bouzon (2018) analyzed the barriers and 
drivers specific to De Paula et al. (2019) carried out a systematic literature review to study 
the innovation opportunities linked with collaboration and trust in RL. The literature review 
is done by Abdulla et al. (2019) also enumerates the studies about return management both 
in online and offline stores but does not include the RL network issues of e-tailers and the 
various barriers and drivers along with it. The study also does not draw out the packaging 
issues, a central concern area for e-tailers. We wish to bring out the mentioned gaps in our 
present study.
The conventional RL network designs mainly cater to the returns of products for Reuse, 
recycling, remanufacturing, or repair. The products for which the mentioned operations 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 A comparative analysis with the previous RL reviews
Reviews
Characteristics of the study
Fleischmann et al. 
(1997)
Carter & Ellram 
(1998)
Bras & Mcintosh 
(1999)
Guide et al. (1999)
Fleischmann et al. 
(2000)
Guide (2000)
Prahinski & Kocaba
soglu (2006)
Srivastava (2007)
Meade et al. (2007)
Sasikumar & Kan
nan (2008a, 2008b)
Subramoniam et al. 
(2009)
The study focused on three major areas of RL, namely distribution planning, 
inventory control, and production planning
Investigated the significant factors in RL process and proposed a model to show 
the interaction of these different factors
The remanufacturing aspect is analyzed, and the developmental work is presented 
to improve its organizational aspects
Production, planning, and control function of remanufacturing is analyzed
The study reviewed the case studies focusing on product recovery
The study delves into the unique characteristics of remanufacturing environments, 
highlighting the absence of comprehensive models for production planning and 
control in this field
The study examines reverse supply chains (RSCs) and proposes research direc
tions using empirical methods, emphasizing the significance of effective RSC 
management for operational enhancement
The study offers a comprehensive classification of green supply chain manage
ment literature, examining its conceptualization, problem contexts, methodologies, 
mathematical tools, and research trends, emphasizing the need for an integrated 
framework in this field
The study conducts a comprehensive review of RL literature, highlighting its 
multi-functional, interdisciplinary nature, emphasizing its relevance from eco
nomic and environmental standpoints,
The reverse distribution and end of life vehicles with inventory management prob
lems are investigated in the study
Then study analyzes the specific facet of strategic decision making in remanufac
turing sector of automobiles
Ilgin & Gupta (2010) The study dives deep into the environmentally conscious manufacturing and prod
uct recovery aspects of RL
Akcali & Cetinkaya 
(2011)
Govindan et al. 
(2015)
Inventory and production planning in a CLSC were analyzed in depth
The study reviewed the CLSC and RL from the recent publications and constructs 
a vital foundation of past research
Agrawal et al. (2015) The study extensively reviews on adoption and implementation challenges, 
product return forecasting, outsourcing, RL networks from a secondary market 
viewpoint, and disposition decision-making
Wang et al. (2017)
The study employs co-citation analysis demonstrating key research themes, knowl
edge clusters, and potential avenues for future research within the realm of RL
Campos et al. (2017) The study pertained specifically to RL for the End of life and End of the industry’s 
use features in the pharmaceutical industry
Rachih et al. (2019)
The study analyzed the solution techniques of meta-heuristics approaches used in 
the RL domain
De Paula et al. 
(2019)
Our paper
Innovation opportunities linked with collaboration and trust in RL were examined 
in the study
Return management attributes and vital decision elements influencing reverse 
logistics network design for e-commerce markets are examined in this study
could not occur are either sent to landfills or incineration centers. However, in the case of 
e-commerce RL network design, the products returned may be perfectly usable and could be 
sold to new customers with new packaging even without being returned to the hub. Hence, 
real-time information data is of prime importance in the case of the RL network of e-com
merce, along with a significant tradeoff of responsiveness and cost. The seller only returns 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
the money once the returned product is received, so a more responsive return logistics sys
tem will help to retain customers and gain customer trust. A differentiating diagram between 
RL and RL for e-commerce has been depicted in Fig. 5. The critical difference lies in RL 
for e-commerce compared to the traditional RL network: the packaging and pricing (Sang
wan, 2017); the return product’s value is maximized in the RL e-commerce channel (Han & 
Trimi, 2018). Additionally, the RL for e-commerce can lead to the product’s strategic and 
operational recapture more than the traditional RL network (Da Silveria et al., 2015).
3.2 Returns management
3.2.1 Importance and necessity of RM in e-commerce
The continued growth in online shopping has created opportunities for various companies. 
Also linked with this opportunity is the challenge of customer returns (Beranek, 2020; Nel 
& Badenhorst, 2020) and the complexities of fraud (John et al., 2020). Heavy returns com
ing from all types of goods are becoming a cause for the sellers. Therefore, manufacturers 
and retailers take the reverse supply chain more responsibly and adequately (Stock et al., 
2002). Returns management is one thing that helps to maintain customer loyalty, and if 
done correctly, it could make all the difference between firms (Bower & Maxham III, 2012; 
Ramanathan, 2011; Röllecke et al., 2018; Stock & Mulki, 2009). Though returns are a bane 
for firms (Patel et al., 2021), a lenient and well-explained return policy will help increase 
demands from online markets (Patel et al., 2021; Samar & Robert, 2004). However, the 
worrisome part is that the firms are still not taking the RL or Returns Management seriously 
instead of treating it as a burden and insignificant for their growth (Rogers et al., 2013).
3.2.2 Challenges in RM
RM is an essential aspect of RL and is becoming one of the most critical challenges the 
industries face (Yang et al., 2015). Since online buying takes away the option of nurturing 
offline relations (Walsh et al., 2010), the scope of making errors is less with online firms. A 
good RM process is one way for online e-commerce firms to look after their relationships 
with customers. The return process in e-commerce should be smooth and leave a good 
Fig. 5 Difference between RL (a) and RL for e-commerce (b) (Davidaviciene & Majzoub, 2021)
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
experience (Kawa, 2019). With the return process, the closely linked feature is a return 
policy, an essential component of RM and one of the foremost pillars of customer satisfac
tion and loyalty (Barman, 2024). It is observed that an easy-going return policy is related 
to an increase in order frequency, return volume (Janakiraman et al., 2016; Lantz & Hjort, 
2013; Yan & Pei, 2019), and return costs (Shang et al., 2017). Around 30% of the online 
purchased products are returned to the retailer (Saleh, 2020). Considering the shipping vol
ume of these returned products creates negative externalities on the environment (Velazquez 
& Chankov, 2019). Hence, the returns cause economic and ecological problems (Beranek, 
2020; Urbanke et al., 2015). At the same time, more lenient policies are expensive in opera
tion and subject to customer abuse (Lantz & Hjort, 2013; Posselt et al., 2008).
Janakiraman et al. (2016) conclude that leniency in return policy affects both purchase 
and return proclivity. However, the former is more than the latter, suggesting that a lenient 
return policy helps retailers increase purchases (Chaleshtari et al., 2022). Also, the leniency 
helps in customer loyalty (Mollenkopf et al., 2007), build relationships (Martínez-López et 
al., 2022); customer trust and market reputation (Pei et al., 2014) also attract more custom
ers (Gelbrich et al., 2017). Also, the returns policy depth, which may include a long return 
window and full refund, will signal the firm’s high service quality and increase the custom
ers’ purchase intentions (Oghazi et al., 2018; Rao et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Yu & Kim, 
2019; Zhang et al., 2017). Though these policies are appealing to customers, they present a 
tradeoff to the firms as they balance customer satisfaction and business goals (Karlsson et 
al., 2023).
3.2.3 RM dimensions and attributes
Rogers et al. (2002) state that RM consists of returns, gatekeeping, avoidance, and reverse 
logistics. Gatekeeping is the entry point of returns flow where, after the initial screening, 
only any return request is accepted (Rogers & Tibben-Lembe, 1999). In the case of returns, 
initial screening is even more difficult as the returned products could be inspected once, 
only when they reach the return point (Griffis et al., 2012). Avoidance refers to activities 
restraining returns (Hjort et al., 2019) with actions like engineering enhancement upgrade in 
product quality (Bernon et al., 2013). A fifth entity service has been added in the dimensions 
mentioned above of the management of RM. Firms that could manage returns as customer 
service offerings can shift the gatekeeping to the next step (Hjort et al., 2019). Also, Elec
tronic service quality has been positively related to electronic satisfaction, which is posi
tively related to electronic Loyalty in the case of online fashion retailers in Spain (Rodriquez 
et al., 2020). With the attributes and dimensions mentioned above, comprehensive return 
management is depicted in Fig. 6. Where the different stages are mentioned, and their key 
features are highlighted.
Therefore, returns management is a holistic approach for better customer retention and 
satisfaction. Rogers et al. (2002) described different returns like consumer and environ
mental returns. They also stressed that each type of return is to be handled with differ
ent processes, and the strategic and operational processes involved in RM were discussed. 
Janakiraman et al. (2016), in their meta-analytic review, had characterized the return into 
f
ive dimensions: time, money, effort, scope, and exchange. Focus and capability in people, 
Knowledge, Skills, technology, and IT systems upgradation are essential for e-tail manage
ment (Ahsan & Rahman, 2022; Jayaraman et al., 2013).
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Returns Management in e-commerce (Source: Authors)
3.2.4 Product return reasons and policies
Research suggests that the leading causes for the returns were a defect in the product(Ambilkar 
et al., 2022), followed by the claim of regret in the purchase or the expectations not being 
met with the product (De Araujo et al., 2018; Kaushik et al., 2022; Mollenkopf et al., 2011), 
incorrectly described product, or ambiguous information (Rabinovich et al., 2011), impul
sive buying (Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b). Product quality has also been established as an 
essential determinant in affecting customer satisfaction and product returns (Li et al., 2013; 
Lin et al., 2020; Misra & Arivazhagan, 2017). However, studies have also suggested that 
product fit uncertainty has caused more product returns than product quality issues (Hong 
& Pavlou, 2014). Even the promotional offers prompt customers to make riskier purchases, 
which eventually increases the returns (El Kihal & Shehu, 2022; Shehu et al., 2020), which 
ultimately lead to additional financial burdens on the firms (Frei et al., 2022).
E-tailers either set up operation and management functions to recover the return cost or 
transfer these to customers (Vilar-Zanon et al., 2017). Research has shown that some firms 
have considered imposing shipping, restocking, and handling fees on return items (Hua et 
al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2020). Customers will be ready to pay the restocking fees if they are 
assured that online purchase has better quality than brick-and-mortar purchases (Difran
cesco & Huchzermeier, 2020). In his study, Beranek (2020) concluded that a state-imposed 
return fee is the best alternative to deal with returns.
Selling the returned products once repaired through the e-markets leads to a higher stan
dard deviation in profits (Choi et al., 2004). Saastamoinen (2009), through the study, stressed 
that investment made in reputation could help the firm receive returns, and additionally, the 
increase in small sellers in the market influences the price. Ramanathan (2011), through 
an empirical study intending to analyze how risk characteristics of a product influenced 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
customer loyalty and concluded that customers are happier when they can return products 
without any complications, influencing customer loyalty.
One way of limiting these returns was suggested as limiting payment options, as it is 
observed that customers who pay on delivery are twice as likely to return compared to 
those who pay in advance (Urbanke et al., 2015). It is also observed that when products 
are sold at a lower price, they exhibit less return rate (Shang et al., 2019). Methods, as sug
gested by Ishfaq et al. (2016), where the e-tailers offer free shipping to the customers and 
a 30 days return policy for a refund minus the restocking fee, could effectively discourage 
return fraud. Even replacement policy could also be looked as an alternate to return policy 
to give better outcomes to the firms (Mondal & Giri, 2022). The use of return credit as a 
monetary instrument is also one way to reduce returns (Martínez-López et al., 2023). Return 
freight insurance as a means to reduce return costs incurred by retailers is also a suggested 
instrument (Zhang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023). The use of machine learn
ing techniques also helps to understand customer return behavior using past data (Policarpo 
et al., 2021). Predictive algorithms have been developed to reduce return fraud (Cui et al., 
2020; Heilig et al., 2016; John et al., 2017; Rajasekaran & Priyadarshini, 2021; Urbanke 
et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2020). Table 2 illustrates more on the different aspects of the RM 
process and key features.
3.2.5 Customer behaviors and strategies
Pei & Paswan (2018) divided the consumer’s return into two parts: legitimate and opportu
nistic return behavior. Opportunistic return behavior involves the misuse or exploitation of 
the return policy of online firms (Kaushik et al., 2020). The legitimate return, like impulsive 
buying, could be reduced by detailed advertising, whereas it is difficult to reduce opportu
nistic returns. Even the free return tag does not affect the customer’s return behavior (Walsh 
& Mohring, 2017). Research has also shown that the likelihood of returns depends on the 
regularity of the order delivery date promised and the actual delivery date (Rao et al., 2014; 
Zhao et al., 2018). The product returned will also invoke negative online reviews and may 
impact the e-tailer’s sales and reputation (Sahoo et al., 2018; Sun & Zhao, 2022).
In his exploratory study, Bernon et al. (2013) provided a conceptual framework where 
operational performance, organizational integration, and management reporting and control, 
if appropriately implemented, will give optimal results in terms of reduction in returns—
focusing on incentivizing for the reduction in returns. Li et al. (2018) proposed a framework 
Hypergo to predict customer return, and the framework was based on historical purchases 
and subsequent return records. It can help the firms reduce returns. When a customer with 
high return intention purchases a product, the firms could incentivize the customer not to 
return the product or prepare for the RL. Walsh & Brylla (2017) studied how consumer 
behavior and attitudes are affected once the product has been returned. Table 3 depicts the 
customer perspective and reactions to different RM processes and policies.
In physical stores, the return mechanism operations significantly differ from those in 
online stores. Online stores could incur heavy losses if they do not have a well-planned, 
managed, and effective reverse logistics channel. Therefore, research on RL network design 
for e-commerce is one area that is significantly gaining interest from the research commu
nity. Next, we will discuss the various RL models.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Review of the RM in E-commerce study (Retailer Perspective)
RM aspects Features and remarks
Return 
In online markets, the service offered to customers is similar to trying 
Service
Return 
frauds
Return 
policy
Product 
returns
Return 
handling 
Process
Return 
Costs
on clothes from the wardrobe
The scope of error making is less in online stores as it takes away the 
feature of nurturing offline stores
Good service helps to reduce customer dissatisfaction
Reduction in product returns has also been achieved through exem
plary customer service
Returning without a valid reason. For example, purchasing a dress to 
wear on special occasion and then returning back
To make an online purchase to replace a damaged product
Customers were returning products that were not even the original 
ones
Return policy essential components include time window for return, 
terms and conditions of return, and money-back guarantee
Return Policies are based on the signaling theory, suggesting a com
mitment to customer service
Depth of return policy (Justice Theory) depicts the fairness of a 
policy and reasonability of the seller’s price, service, and policy
Lenient Return Policy: It consists of free returns, a longer return 
window
Moderate Return Policy: It is a mix of leniency and confinement. It 
includes acceptance of return with valid proof and with strict time 
windows
Strict return Policy: It has many gatekeeping rules to avoid return 
acceptance
Defects majorly cause it in product incorrect information displayed
Product fit uncertainty
The significant interrelated steps are gatekeeping, avoidance, e
service, and reverse logistics
The complex and inconvenient return process is not suitable for 
customer retention
The cost of processing returns in online markets is higher compared 
to the brick and mortar stores
It is a vital cost that cannot be avoided in online business
Online retailers can decide return fees for unconditional returns
Authors
Hjort et al., (2019)
Ahsan & Rahman, 
(2022); Walsh et al., 
(2010)
Mollenkopf et al., 
(2007); Rodriquez 
et al., (2020)
Walsh et al., (2016)
Wachter et al., 
(2012)
Nel & Badenhorst, 
(2020)
Harris, (2010); 
Wachter et al., 
(2012)
Shang et al., (2017); 
Zhang et al., (2017)
Oghazi et al., 
(2018)
Pei et al., (2014)
Difrancesco et al., 
(2018); Rao et al., 
(2018)
Pei et al., (2014)
Yu & Kim, (2019)
De Araujo et al., 
(2018); Rabinovich 
et al., (2011)
Hong & Pavlou, 
(2014); Jauhar et 
al., (2023)
Hjort et al., (2019)
Griffis et al., (2012)
Difrancesco et al., 
(2018)
Liu, (2014)
Hua et al., (2016)
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Review of the RM in E-commerce study (Consumer Perspective)
Customer 
Aspects
Features
Authors
Customer 
satisfaction 
and Loyalty
Customer 
returns 
behavior
Customer 
Purchase 
Intention
Positive service encounters reduce negative customer 
experience
A lenient return policy helps to increase customer satisfaction 
and loyalty
The product’s features and attributes depicted in the online 
match compared to the original impact have a distinct effect 
on customer satisfaction
On-time delivery and a fast, smooth return process affect 
customer loyalty positively
The behavioral causes for return are no-fault returns, fraudu
lent return behavior, or change of mind
Legitimate returns include faulty or damaged products and 
wrong product delivery
Opportunistic behavior includes misuse of the e-tailer policy
Dependent on the quality of the product
Depth in return policy positively affects customer purchase 
intention
Lenient return policy, long return window, and easy return 
process also positively affect the purchase intention.
Jain et al., (2017); Ferraz et 
al., (2023)
Bower & Maxham III, 
(2012); Janakiraman et 
al., (2016); Lantz & Hjort, 
(2013); Ramanathan, 
(2011); Röllecke et al., 
(2018); Stock & Mulki, 
(2009); Yan & Pei, (2019)
Hong & Pavlou, (2014)
Rao et al., (2014); Zhao et 
al., (2018)
Chen et al., (2020a, 2020b); 
de Araujo et al., (2018); Pei 
& Paswan, (2018)
Pei & Paswan, (2018)
Kaushik et al., (2020)
Li et al., (2013)
Pei et al., (2014)
Zhang et al., (2017)
3.3 Product-specific e-commerce network
3.3.1 RL process in e-commerce
The traditional RL network has been taken up in various studies. The significant difference 
compared to the RL network for e-commerce has been highlighted above and illustrated 
in Fig. 5. Also, research has shown that conventional RL network consists of Acquisition, 
collection, inspection/sorting, and disposition (Agrawal et al., 2015). The mentioned net
work will not explain the RL for e-commerce, and some changes are required to fit into the 
scheme of e-commerce. Research has suggested that there is a need for the incorporation of 
asset recovery in the network design (Dutta et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2018) and the presence 
of a secondary market or reuse facility in the market (Guo et al., 2017a, 2017b; Zhuang et 
al., 2016) and inventory storage update with types of returns (Das et al., 2020; He et al., 
2019). We attempt to capture these inputs in the robust network design depicted in Fig. 7. 
The further explanation of the variables depicted is also explained below.
Information/Information Flow: Information is a carrier that can be generated, stored, 
processed, transmitted, retrieved, and used (Weiland, 2017), which works in both directions 
for customers and e-commerce firms to have seamless transactions and easy working of 
services of the firms. It is essential for effective production and services (Jayasinghe et al., 
2019). Integration of information systems in RL networks helps improve customer service 
(Daugherty et al., 2002). Also, the growth in internet penetration has led to a smoother 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Reverse logistics flow in e-commerce network
information flow and has helped online commerce adjust to the geography of trade flows 
(Hortacsu et al., 2009). In their study, Shi et al. (2012) analyzed how integrating information 
systems helps Management in RL and waste management. The importance of information 
f
low in the RL supply chain was also stressed by Chileshe et al. (2019), who discussed how 
improvement could be brought about in the present reverse system using an effective infor
mation system. The use of information can also be seen in Fig. 8, where the information 
plays a crucial role in the timely disbursal of return credits and coordination for the return 
pickup.
Collection Center: In collection centers, customers are asked to drop at the nearest col
lection center. Sometimes, crowdsourcing ways are also used to drop to the nearest collec
tion center (Pan et al., 2015) or integrate the return process with the regular order-dropping 
orders (Schrotenboer et al., 2019). Once the product reaches the collection center, the pos
session of the product gets into the hands of firms (Fleischmann, 2003).
4R (Resell, Reuse, Recycle, Remanufacture): The concept of 4R was initially stated 
by Fleischmann (2000) in his seminal work on the RL network design. The 4R in RL of 
e-commerce are (1) restock in the firm’s warehouse or partner retailer storage location, (2) 
repackaging for sale through the original e-commerce website, (3) returning to the vendor 
if the product is damaged or defected, and (4) Refurbished/Recycled product to be obtained 
from vendor be sold back through the e-commerce website.
Alternative use of waste: The alternative uses include energy recovery, compositing 
(Papargyropoulou et al., 2014), biofuels, and bioproducts (Girotto et al., 2015) from food 
waste. Make carpets and blankets from shoddy yarn (Abraham, 2011).
The network types are sub-grouped here into RL in one e-commerce design, with various 
products being sold through one common platform and varying return policies for different 
products. Then, the RL network for food e-commerce is reviewed, which could further be 
segmented into different sub-segments like fresh food, groceries, and restaurant-delivered 
food. Every division needs different treatment techniques based on the shelf life. The RL 
network for apparel e-commerce only deals with apparel. The scrapped product treatments 
vary depending on the material and textile used. The one common issue, irrespective of the 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 A typical flowchart of RL in e-commerce
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
e-commerce network type, is the packaging waste and how it could be reduced. Reusing is 
one central area to look into in the future.
Figure 8 illustrates the flow chart of how e-commerce occurs, from the customer raising 
the return request to the e-tailer picking up the order and issuing the return credits based 
on policy and initial inspection. The various ways of treating the returns are illustrated, 
with restocking, repackaging, returning to manufacturers/ vendors, and disposition being 
the primary options.
3.3.2 E-commerce network
Considering the specific RL network design for e-commerce, return logistics form a crucial 
component of the network design. The product return makes the network more complex 
(Wang, 2015). Moreover, when product returns from cross-border e-commerce are consid
ered, the complexity increases (Wang et al., 2020).
3.3.2.1 Types of RL models in e-commerce Kokkianki et al. (2002) carried out one of the 
f
irst works linking RL with e-commerce. The role of web enablement in the efficient han
dling of returns was stressed via online tracking, and faster delivery reduces the chances of 
returns for perishable and gift items, consolidating different return channels. Three models 
have proposed return aggregators, which aggregate returns from original equipment man
ufacturers without owning them, specialty locators, which focus on specialized parts or 
products, and integrated solution providers, who use web technology as a facilitator for pro
viding unique services. Yanyan (2010) studied different reverse models for an e-commerce 
model and strategies for choosing a more fitting model. The characteristics noted for an RL 
in e-commerce were the Intensive logistics system, collaborative logistics network, and 
Flexible Customer Relationship Management.
3.3.2.2 Optimization models (inventory, vehicle routing, demand uncertainty, and customer 
behavior) Mathematical models were developed catering to the dynamic needs of the RL 
network for the e-commerce market. Studies have acknowledged that managing and receiv
ing returns using a cost-effective logistics network in the online markets is a challenge 
(Griffies et al., 2012; Schrotenboer et al., 2017). Different models were proposed to opti
mize several objectives. Zhang et al.’s (2020) multi-objective model was directed to choose 
the vehicle type, optimal logistics decision, and the minimum number of online orders in 
each transport cycle to optimize the cost. Hu et al. (2010) took a mathematical approach 
to the problem, considering uncertainty in demand, the recall, and returns of goods. The 
location inventory model with a secondary market presence was taken up by Guo et al. 
(2018). Daultani et al., (2022) introduce a novel logistics network design for both new and 
refurbished goods in e-commerce to optimize cost across the supply chain. Using a MILP 
approach, it tackles complexities involving procurement, inventory, returns, and transporta
tion. The models proposed by Chen et al., (2020a, 2020b) and Zhuang et al. (2016) have 
investigated routing problems with time consideration. Inventory specific to perishable 
items has been analyzed in the studies of Gu et al. (2018) and Ekren et al. (2021). Network 
optimization specific to e-commerce to minimize costs was taken up by Cao et al. (2016), 
Das et al.(2020),Deng et al. (2016), Liu (2014), Guo et al.,(2017a, 2017b), XiaoYan et al. 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
(2012), Zaarour et al. (2014) with various variations. The recent research by Thibbotuwawa 
et al. (2023) has extended the network optimization problem by integrating it with Industry 
4.0 technologies.
The vehicle routing problem in e-commerce optimization has increasingly emphasized 
the efficient routing of returns to sellers to mitigate escalating transportation costs. The 
study of Prajapati et al. (2021a) and (2021b) have worked to reduce the time horizon to 
deliver products by focusing on the sustainable logistics network. The Triple Bottom Line 
framework was integrated into the vehicle routing model for a CLSC network designed by 
Mallari et al. (2023). While the study of Li et al., 2024, assessed the advantage of having an 
integrated truck-drone service mode over solely relying on trucks in the designed vehicle 
routing problem.
The other mathematical models varied with different objective functions. Dutta et al. 
(2020) developed a multi-objective model to optimize the overall cost of the network 
consisting of incineration customer markets, delivery hubs, fulfillment centers, recycling 
centers, and landfills. Prajapati et al. (2022) concentrated on crafting a logistics network 
encompassing initial grain collection and final distribution while prioritizing sustainability’s 
triple bottom line. The role of government in successfully implementing RL practices was 
studied by Yao & Ran (2019) using the evolutionary game method. The study concluded 
that the government’s intense supervision would help in the successful implementation of 
RL. Wang (2015) developed an RL evaluation index system based on customer behavior, 
and based on the index, the call to accept a return should be taken.
3.3.2.3 Barriers and drivers Xu & Jiang (2009) classified the characteristics of RL in the 
e-commerce environment. They showcased that internal neglect and higher system com
plexity act as barriers. In contrast, a zero-return policy for some commodities and a sup
porting mechanism for talented people could help solve the problem. In the detailed study 
focusing on the barriers, Naseem et al. (2021) listed the barriers broadly into five groups, 
namely Management-related, infrastructure, coordination issues, policy, and financial.
The barriers to RLND of e-commerce consist of a lack of awareness, lack of laws, and 
supportive economic policies (Jindal & Sangwan, 2011), the focus of top management on 
forward logistics, along with lack of proper training, education, and guidance about RL 
(Chung & Zhang, 2011; Jindal & Sangwan, 2011). The lack of support from the other logis
tics partner (Li & Olorunniwo, 2008), lack of technological infrastructure, lack of invest
ment, and uncertainty in demand are the other significant key barriers (Pokharel & Mutha, 
2009). A more comprehensive study was conducted by Lamba et al. (2019) where the barri
ers were finalized by taking the perspective of both customers and service providers, primar
ily being lack of investment in RL, lack of understanding, lack of transportation and storage 
facilities were the significant barriers.
The major drivers identified for effective implementation are Management, employees, 
IT and technology, return policy, infrastructure, organizational structure and culture, cus
tomer service, and quality management (Davidaviciene & Majzoub, 2021). Also, a well
defined return process and the establishment of a well-equipped RL will promote customer 
purchase and satisfaction (Anh & Khoa, 2023; Mollenkopf et al., 2007), which could be a 
system-based driver. Also, while choosing a third-party reverse logistics provider(3PRLP), 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
the drivers identified were cost, lead time, customer’s voice, delivery and service, and qual
ity (Wang et al., 2021). Also, the Effective RL implementation will drive the circular flow 
of materials and implementation of a circular economy, which will help to reduce wastage 
(Nanayakkara et al., 2022). Table 4 summarizes the critical studies and their findings in RL 
for e-commerce.
3.3.2.4 Strategies Guojing & Ciping (2010) studied the network design from the strategic 
view and proposed that having a simple return goods policy, integrating different feedback, 
and analyzing the different reasons for returned goods could help decrease the operating 
cost and increase profits. An RL information management system that understands and ana
lyzes the reasons for returns could also reduce returns (Yang, 2014).
A third-party logistics partner for better handling the product’s reverse flow could improve 
the firms’ RL efficiency (Ma, 2010). Wang et al. (2020) took the problem of product returns 
in cross-border e-commerce to help the retailers choose the optimal mode of logistics that 
considers the marketing strategies and return demands. Methods like restocking, disposi
tion, and scrap utilization were suggested to reduce waste and make an efficient RL network 
for e-commerce (Biswas & Kader, 2018). The method of refurbishing and recycling could 
also lead to zero waste disposal for products like cellphone (Santana et al., 2021).
3.3.2.5 Collection system Collecting the returned items has not been discussed with much 
emphasis. One way to collect these returned products has been for the seller to pick them up 
from the door, and the second is for a customer dropping to a nearby facility. Additionally, a 
crowdsourcing solution was proposed by Pan et al. (2015) in which concepts of crowdsourc
ing and the physical internet were proposed. The thought was to incentivize the taxi drivers 
by giving little money, who are always in constant mobility, to collect goods and drop them 
at a reliable preassigned shop. It is assumed that packages are assigned to taxis with drivers 
who are not changing the routes. It will help reduce carbon emissions, be socially friendly, 
and be more economical. Jianyu et al. (2015) suggested a grid-based distribution system to 
manage returns coming from online buying by the customers effectively.
3.3.2.6 Omni-channel returns The growing popularity of omnichannel retail (Jena & 
Meena, 2022; Qiu et al., 2023; Risberg, 2023; Zhang et al., 2018) offers the flexibility of 
cross-channel returns (Akturk et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2022; Narang & Shankar, 2019; Pals
son et al., 2017).The Omni channel is more advantageous when the cost of RL is high. 
Otherwise, the retailers prefer only online stores (Mandal et al., 2021).
In omnichannel retail, the Buy –online –Return-To-store (BORS) strategy is more pop
ular compared to the Buy –online –Return-To-Non-store (BORNS) (Akturk et al., 2018; 
Huang & Jin, 2020; Palsson et al., 2017; Radhi & Zhang, 2019; Shi et al., 2018) and has 
helped to draw new customers (Yang & Ji, 2022; Yang et al., 2023a, 2023b). One advantage 
that BORS offers is that it can consolidate online and store returns (He et al., 2020), which 
has also helped omnichannel firms derive more profit (Li et al., 2021). The Buy Online Pick 
up in Store (BOPS) strategy has also been found to be helpful for increasing firms’ profits 
and reducing packaging waste (Peng et al., 2022). However, the uncertain returns compli
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Authors Remarks Methodology
Kokkianki et 
al. (2002)
The first kind of work in linking RL and e-commerce, furthermore, com
ing up with specific models for practice
Evidence
based study
Yanyan 
(2010)
The Strategies for choosing a fitting model for an RL network in e
commerce were discussed
Discussion
Hu et al. 
(2010)
A multi-objective approach for location inventory problems Multi-objective 
optimization
Zaarour et al. 
(2014)
To locate return centers that could help reduce the inventory holding cost 
and reduce unit transportation cost of return-shipped products
Network 
optimization
Yao et al. 
(2019)
A Tripartite game where e-commerce firms, government, and consumer 
behavior were analyzed
Evolutionary 
game method
Cao et al. 
(2016)
The multi-objective model is aimed at minimizing the cost and maximiz
ing customer satisfaction
Multi-objective 
optimization
Guo et al. 
(2018)
Decisions relating to location inventory for a closed supply chain consid
ering the secondary market
Optimization
Wang (2015) Based on customer behavior, it is to be decided whether to accept the 
customer request
Optimization
Lamba et al. 
(2019)
The barriers for RLND of e-commerce were studied Fuzzy-AHP
Jindal & 
Sangwan 
(2011)
RLND of e-commerce was studied where factors about the Indian market 
were studied using Interpretive Structural Modeling
ISM
He et al. 
(2019)
The storage strategy for RL in e-commerce is suggested where inventory 
error coefficients are added in the classical model, and thereby, a new 
profit newsboy model is proposed
Optimization
Liu (2014) A network of RL for e-commerce considering the returned objects is sent 
from the collection point to the recycling center. The objective was to 
minimize the total cost and optimize collection, recycling, and remanu
facturing centers’ number and location
Optimization
Deng et al. 
(2016)
It has proposed a Hybrid ant colony optimization (HACO) algorithm 
which considers both the quality defects and non-defects in the chain. It 
helped to minimize the cost of the network
Algorithm 
Development
Jianyu et al. 
(2015)
Suggested a grid-based distribution system to manage returns coming 
from online buying effectively
Simulation
Pan et al. 
(2015)
The concepts of crowdsourcing and physical internet were used. The 
thought was to incentivize the taxi drivers by giving little money, who 
are always on constant mobility to collect goods and drop to a reliable 
preassigned shop
Crowdsourc
ing and 
optimization
Biswas & 
Kader (2018)
RL challenges were studied seeing the advent of the internet and rising 
returns, then methods like restocking, disposition, and utilizing the scrap 
were suggested to reduce waste
A discussion 
paper and 
evidence-based 
study
Ma (2010) The existing strategies like starting point management, process manage
ment, follow-up management were reviewed and improved
A discussion 
paper and 
evidence-based 
study
Guojing 
& Ciping 
(2010)
The network design from the strategic view where it was proposed that 
having a relaxed returns good policy, integrating different feedback, and 
analyzing the different reasons for returned goods could help decrease 
the operating cost
A discussion 
paper and 
evidence-based 
study
Xu & Jiang 
(2009)
Classified the characteristics of RL in an e-commerce environment and 
factors that could help solve the problem
A discussion 
paper and 
evidence-based 
study
Table 4 Review of the Key work of RL for e-commerce
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 (continued)
Authors
XiaoYan et 
al. (2012)
Liu (2014)
Zhang et al. 
(2019)
Remarks
A MILP mathematical model that could deal with the returned products 
for e-businesses. With four players: Factories, online retailers, Third
party logistics (3PLs), and markets
Optimization of the E-commerce RL network cost
The proposed model is aimed at optimizing the network route. The study 
helps choose the vehicle type, optimal logistics decision, and the mini
mum number of online orders in each transport cycle to optimize the cost
Methodology
Optimization
Optimization
Optimization
cate the situation for retailers as these returns complicate the inventory and replenishment 
decisions (Goedhart et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024). While,the customer preferences for omni 
channels are governed by walking distance to the store (Guerrero-Lorente et al., 2020), 
convenience, and transparency (Xie et al., 2023).
In the systematic literature, de Borba et al. (2020) focused on omnichannel returns and 
developed a framework covering forty-three decision elements broadly categorized in the 
realm of last-mile delivery, last-mile back-end fulfillment, supply, and internal distribu
tion. Return policies with modifications were studied by game theoretic models in recent 
years. The exchange policy tradeoff between online and offline options (Sun et al., 2024); 
retailer optimal return strategy with a focus on consumer disappointment aversion (Shen 
et al., 2022) and in presence of competition (Jin et al., 2020); retailers optimal ordering 
strategy along with the pricing decision (He et al., 2020);consumer return policies (Nag
eswaran et al., 2020);Choosing the optimal strategy between BORS and BOPS strategy by 
the retailer(Liu et al., 2023); Investigating when a pure online retailer go for omni channel 
strategy (Liu & Xiong, 2023).
The all-in-one network generally considers all kinds of products, which are electronic 
items from a vital entity. Though no research paper distinguishes differently for electronic 
e-commerce, the basic idea of WEEE (waste of electrical and electronic equipment) man
agement remains the same as discussed in Barba-gutierrez et al. (2008), Habibi et al. (2014), 
John et al. (2020), Bal & Satoglu (2018). The only difference lies in the customer’s use of 
information and other challenges discussed above in returns management.
The literature has applied a single model for all goods categories to explain the RL 
network for e-commerce (Liu (2014); Wenjuan & Wang, 2015). We believe that such an 
approach ignores inter-category differences, e.g., the RL design of electronic equipment 
differs from the RL design of a food network or apparel network in terms of waste man
agement, dumping, and return policies. Therefore, we think there is a need to research and 
design category-specific RL networks.
3.3.3 E-commerce: apparel network
3.3.3.1 Return rate and challenges The cumulative data shows a bright picture for the fash
ion industry; business is expected to grow from $481.2 billion in 2018 to $712.9 billion by 
2022 (Orendorff, 2019). Hence, it is observed that apparel e-commerce is exponentially 
rising worldwide, but at the same time, returns are also expected to grow manifold. With 
the ease of shopping online, the shopping culture of customers has changed with the avail
able options of getting faster deliveries of multiple items with varying sizes and colors 
and additional options to return what they dislike (Velazquez & Chankov, 2019). It is also 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
observed by Kim et al., (2011), by looking into differentiating attributes in men’s and wom
en’s apparel websites and found out that e-services required by men are more sophisticated 
than women in the E- e-retailers websites. Hence, website sophistication also plays a vital 
role in the customer’s correct buying, thereby reducing the chances of return.
One of the foremost challenges faced by online retailers is managing these high volumes 
of returns (Wood, 2001). Fit uncertainty is one of the fashion industry’s significant driv
ers for product returns (Gustafsson et al., 2021). In order to manage these returns effec
tively, there is a need to handle returns efficiently by having a simple and easy return policy. 
Though these return policies may vary from firm to firm, some have a lenient return policy, 
though not free, and some have a free return policy. However, it is observed that free-of
charge return policies do not always ensure long-term profitability (Hjort & Lantz, 2016). 
Hence, a return policy focusing on the ease of returns will help reduce waste, increase profit, 
and develop an efficient RL network for apparel e-commerce. The better presentation of 
products on offer by additional features such as zoom-in and 360-degree view could also 
help to reduce returns (Stöcker et al., 2021).
3.3.3.2 Textile waste and treatment With the onset of internet growth and new informa
tion communication technologies flaring the market, the trend travels faster nowadays. It 
creates volatility in demand and a shorter life cycle for fashion products (Caniato et al., 
2012), creating more textile waste. The proper treatment of textile wastes (TW) through 
segregation instead of incineration would help reduce environmental degradation. Product 
recovery reuse contributes to lessening the adverse impact on the environment (Govindan 
& Popiuc, 2014). If the number of residues in different clusters is added, it becomes sig
nificant for recycling (Dhanda & Peters, 2005). Pinheiro et al. (2019) have researched and 
identified opportunities for improvement in the use of RL in clothing industries and listed 
down different existing strengths in the treatment of textile waste (TW). The research elabo
rates on the strengths of the literature to bring out the importance of adequate disposition 
and proper segregation of wastes, which enables Reuse, thereby helping the market reduce 
waste. Mayo (2021) suggested the use of novel compostable polymers to reduce the TW.
The challenges while developing an RL network specifically for apparel e-commerce 
are very different from traditional RL network design. The rising incidence of returns is a 
massive concern for e-commerce operators. Textile waste generation and proper recycling 
are daunting challenges worldwide (Domina & Koch, 1999). In the case of apparel, the RL 
network requires a proper inspection channel to check defects, and after that, delegation on 
the defect decides whether to reuse, remanufacture, or recycle. Reselling defected apparel is 
also an option, but no significant research has been conducted on the utility of this approach.
3.3.3.3 Optimization problems (inventory, vehicle routing, and cost optimization) Guo et 
al., (2017a, 2017b) developed one of the first optimization models for apparel e-commerce, 
considering the RL network’s multi-period and dynamic joint construction model. The study 
forms a basis for reducing the regional RL cost. Adding to this, the multi-objective model 
suggested by Dutta et al. (2020) developed the model on three fronts, i.e., economic cost, 
environmental impact, and social responsibility. To reduce returns in apparel e-commerce, 
an innovative vehicle routing problem with an uncertain "try on time "was proposed by Hu 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
et al. (2015) to save return costs and improve customer satisfaction by providing an experi
ence to improve customer loyalty. Das et al. (2020) designed an RL network for fashion 
e-commerce firms with inventory, transportation, and facilities costs. They found out that 
the inventory cost is meager than the transportation cost, including the returned product 
from the customer to the initial collection center and from the warehouse. Hence, efficiency 
in transportation has to be worked for RL in e-commerce. Table 5 briefly describes the 
research done in RL for online apparel and the findings that could be used in further research 
concerning the area.
3.3.4 E-commerce: food e-commerce
3.3.4.1 RL challenges and dimensions E-commerce growth and advancement have grown 
leaps and bounds, and there are new developments seen in fresh food e-commerce, mak
ing it a new strategic field for traditional e-commerce firms (Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b). 
While considering the food e-commerce firms, factors like time-critical delivery, high prod
uct variety, food quality factor, and arrival time windows are considered in addition to the 
traditional e-commerce firms (Tsang et al., 2020).
With the recent COVID pandemic, online grocery shopping has taken a forward leap 
(Keyes, 2020). Also, grocery stores and supermarkets have implemented new strategies to 
cater to the new demand, like appealing to websites and mobile applications (Dominici et 
al., 2021). Similarly, the delivery of other food items like fresh vegetables, cooked food, 
and other eatables has increased in developing countries. Therefore, the design of the RL 
network for food e-commerce brings out different challenges due to multiple subcategories, 
as mentioned above. Given these subcategories’ varying shelf lives, it is crucial to have a 
speedy and responsive logistics system in place. During transportation, each type of fresh 
food has its temperature requirement to be maintained (Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b; Tsang et 
al., 2020). Hence, it will be unviable to treat them homogeneously.
Reverse food logistics across the product life cycle was studied by (Vlachos, 2014), 
where speed, flexibility, reliability, quality, and sustainability were considered the perfor
mance indicators for reverse food logistics. The study’s key finding was that effectiveness 
in the introduction phase, and the Management of quality-related problems would determine 
the success of future RL in the food chain. Perishability and inaccuracy in demand forecast
ing also led to inventory issues in food e-commerce networks (Ekren et al., 2021).
3.3.4.2 Waste treatment and disposal Also, Food waste generated through e-commerce 
networks is a huge issue. Food waste is a subset of food loss, which signifies a reduction 
in quantity or quality for any reason throughout the supply chain. In contrast, food waste 
refers to materials meant for human consumption but not consumed (Kibler et al., 2018). 
Heterogeneity in generation patterns and the varying physical and chemical properties with 
inconsistency in quantity have made food waste management a big challenge (Joshi & Vis
vanathan, 2019). These food wastes could be generated due to various reasons like excess 
buying, inadequate labeling, poor storage facilities, transportation, and packaging defects 
(Gustavsson et al., 2011). There are also social reasons like lack of awareness, poor plan
ning, and accepting the waste of food as a social norm (Joshi & Visvanathan, 2019) for food 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Review of the RL for ap
parel e-commerce
Authors
Pinheiro et 
al. (2019)
Hjort & 
Lantz (2016)
Dutta et al. 
(2020)
Govindan 
& Popiuc 
(2014)
Guo et al., 
(2017a, 
2017b)
Das et al. 
(2020)
de Leeuw et 
al., (2016)
Velazquez et 
al. (2019)
Gustafsson 
et al. (2021)
Findings/Remarks
The study elaborates on the strengths 
of the literature to bring out the 
importance of adequate disposition and 
proper segregation of wastes, which 
enables Reuse, thereby helping the 
market reduce waste
How a return policy focusing on the 
ease of returns will help reduce waste 
and help to develop an efficient RL 
network for apparel e-commerce
The model had set goals on three 
fronts, i.e., economic cost, environ
mental impact, and social responsibil
ity. The model considered different 
types of technologies present in the 
delivery hub and mother warehouse 
to process and transfer products 
efficiently
Proper treatment of Textile Wastes 
(TW) through segregation instead of 
incineration would be helpful to reduce 
environmental degradation and how 
Product recovery reuse contributes to 
lessening the adverse impact on the 
environment
In consideration, a multi-period and 
dynamic joint construction model of 
the reverse logistics network optimiza
tion model was used with apparel in 
e-commerce
Designed an RL network for fashion e
commerce firms with inventory costs, 
transportation costs, facilities cost
The study focused on the apparel 
market and how to make a tradeoff be
tween efficiently handling the returns, 
strategizing to reduce customer returns, 
and, at the same time, increasing sales 
through RM
The environmental impact caused by 
online returns of fashion products was 
studied
The study aimed to analyze the return 
costs, the primary reason for return 
being uncertainty in fit
Methodology
Case study
Empirical 
study
Multi
objective 
optimization
A discussion 
paper and 
evidence
based study
Multi
objective 
optimization
Optimization
Empirical 
Study
Empirical
Case study
wastage. Cold storage facilities for frozen foods, processing, and distribution are the other 
factors that may lead to food losses. The food waste will also be coupled with disposable 
plates, utensils, and bags, significantly impacting the environment (Song et al., 2018). Apart 
from the economic and environmental losses, these wastes also create health hazards (FAO, 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
2011). Table 6 illustrates the vital work done in food e-commerce, and critical findings are 
also elaborated.
Studies conducted by Dominici et al. (2021), Naseri & Elliott (2011), and Arce-Urriza 
& Cebollada (2010) have found that the young population buys more from online grocery 
stores. Hence, these young people could be made more aware of the detrimental effects 
of food wastage and restrict themselves from buying additional food items through social 
media.
Even after trying out the above ways, the possibility of food waste cannot be eliminated. 
The dumping and disposal of food waste are also huge environmental problems (Salem
deeb et al., 2017). In developing countries, incomplete food waste management systems 
especially lead to environmental and sanitary problems (Thi et al., 2015). Since waste can 
be a resource, a notion on which sustainable resource management is based (Bringezu & 
Bleischwitz, 2017), the concentration of e-commerce firms should reduce and utilize waste. 
The waste hierarchy represents various measures applied to materials, food, and substances 
before and after they have become waste (Gharfalkar et al., 2015). It lists prevention, prepa
ration for reuse, recycling, recovery, and disposal (UNION, 2008), with prevention as the 
most preferred option and disposal being the least preferred.
Composting and animal feed as the feasible recycling options, anaerobic digestion for 
recovery energy, redistribution of food through various networks and food banks to reuse 
the food by giving it to the poor, disposing of the unavoidable waste into engineered land
f
ills could be carried out in the waste hierarchy system (Papargyropoulou et al., 2014). 
Even in recent times, increasing efforts have been made to obtain biofuel and bio-products 
from food waste (Girotto et al., 2015). For promoting recycling in Japan, a law promotes 
a recycling loop where the food industries are pushed to buy farm products (Takata et al., 
2012). The food wastes generated creates economic, environmental, and social problems. 
Table 6 Review of the RL for 
Food e-commerce
Authors
Zhuang et 
al. (2016)
Guo 
et al., 
(2017a, 
2017b)
Ekren et 
al. (2021)
Tsang et 
al. (2020)
Gu et al., 
(2018)
Findings/Remarks
Considering the cost and time sensitiv
ity, a multi-objective model looks into a 
forward and reverse logistics network of 
agricultural products for a rural area in 
China
A two-stage closed-loop RL network de
signed for fresh food e-commerce. In The 
model, food processing plants take care 
of the returned plants by processing them 
into canned or semi-finished products
Lateral inventory sharing in IoT enabled 
food e-commerce to reduce wastage
The study’s basis was integrating the 
internet of things and multi-temperature 
compartment planning. Since each type 
of fresh food during transportation has its 
temperature required to be maintained, 
reducing waste in food e-commerce
An analytical model is designed to calcu
late the optimal price and quantity. This 
model stresses the need to keep the food 
fresh and reduce returns
Methodology
Multi
objective 
optimization
Two-stage 
optimization
Optimization
Optimization
Optimization
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
The target is to minimize the waste by keeping the added value in materials, products, and 
resources for the longest possible cycle (Laso et al., 2018).
3.3.4.3 RL network optimization (cost optimization: vehicle routing: network optimiza
tion) Zhuang et al. (2016) developed a multi-objective model that considers cost and time 
sensitivity. Time sensitivity consideration has made the model more realistic and insight
ful because the quality of agricultural products, i.e., fresh fruit, will keep degrading with 
time. Guo et al., (2017a, 2017b) designed a two-stage closed-loop RL network design for 
fresh food e-commerce where the food processing plants take care of the returned plants 
by processing them into canned or semi-finished products. Chen et al., and and’s (2020a, 
2020b) food e-commerce model aimed to reduce waste and restore freshness for a long 
time. They have proposed a multi-compartment vehicle routing problem to minimize the 
total cost, which consists of fixing, refrigeration, travel, and carbon emission costs. Multi
compartment helps transport different products requiring different temperatures to be kept 
at to transport together. For example, kiwi fruit could be maintained at 0 to 7 degrees, while 
meat requiring between − 15 to − 18 degrees could be transported together by keeping in 
different compartments. Gu et al. (2018) observed that firms’ profits increase when more 
efforts are put in to maintain the freshness of the product, though it is independent of the 
return rate. Table 7 lists the prevalent issues in the RL for food e-commerce, like waste uti
lization, food waste prevention, temperature maintenance, routing network, and inventory 
Table 7 Challenges unique to RL 
of food e-commerce
Challenges
Methods suggested in dealing with the 
challenges
Food waste 
prevention
Waste Utilization
Temperature 
Maintenance
Routing Network
Inventory
Creating awareness in consumers (Kibler et 
al., 2018)
Giving to the needy poor (Papargyropoulou 
et al., 2014)
Composting and Animal feed (Papargyropou
lou et al., 2014)
Biofuel and Bio products (Girotto et al., 2015)
Food processing plant (Guo et al., 2017a, 
2017b)
Need for time windows, the multi-temperature 
joint distribution (Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b)
Refrigeration is vital for freshness and 
reduces returns(Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b; Gu 
et al., 2018)
Time sensitivity consideration in the route 
(Chen et al., 2020a, 2020b; Tsang et al., 2020; 
Zhuang et al., 2016)
Internet of things helps identify unanticipated 
accidents and change the alternate route ac
cordingly (Ekren et al., 2021)
Need for Cold storage inventory (Gu et al., 
2018)
Improve forecasting techniques to incorporate 
return uncertainty(Ekren et al., 2021)
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
issues. The table further elaborates on how the research on food waste management and 
food e-commerce has dealt with the abovementioned issues.
3.3.5 E-commerce: packaging waste
3.3.5.1 Packaging and waste treatment challenges The e-commerce market worldwide is 
increasing exponentially, creating economic benefits and testing sustainable development 
(Caiyi et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2020). One major issue with the e-commerce firms that arises 
is the issue of packaging waste (Nath et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022), and it is found to be 
more than the brick and mortar retail (Yang et al., 2023a, 2023b); also, it could be around 4.8 
more times in the case of former(Kim et al., 2022). The main functions of packaging could 
be categorized as protection, convenience, communication, and containment (Schaefer & 
Cheung, 2018), and it is an essential component of online delivery. However, the firms 
still look into packaging and products in different ways, and the main focus is only on the 
consumption of products, leaving the issue of managing packaging waste to the government 
(Ajwani-Ramchandani et al., 2021); this aggravates the matter further. Also, a large portion 
of the greenhouse gas emissions in e-commerce is represented by packaging (Mangiaracina 
et al., 2015).
The organizations want to penetrate deeply by covering all urban and rural areas door
to-door. The need for a packaging system that is reliable and safe to reach the end customer 
safely is of utmost importance. For safer delivery, we need packaging, which requires even 
more packaging materials consisting of cardboard, paper, wood, and plastics, thereby creat
ing a plethora of biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste. The advancement of logistics 
and information has led to the express deliveries offered by firms having a competitive 
advantage, and the use of excessive packaging materials and nonrecyclable materials has 
aggravated the packaging waste problem further (Lin et al., 2022; Pinos et al., 2022; Xiao 
& Zhou, 2020; Xie et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024; Zhilong & Guisheng, 2023). How
ever, it has also been observed that this excessive packaging may hurt customer satisfaction 
(Wang & Zhu, 2020) along with causing harm to the environment and ecology (Grönberg & 
Hulthén, 2022; Guo et al., 2021). Around 30% of the carbon footprints generated by online 
shopping are contributed by shipping packages (Zimmermann & Bliklen, 2020). Packaging 
also creates a case of over-packaging, which may harm humans as the plastic used in pack
aging materials is derived from recycled agricultural film, which may have pesticides in it 
(Duan et al., 2019). Every shipped and distributed product leaves some waste residuals, and 
most of them are produced significantly by the retail sector (Mcleod et al., 2008). Though 
packaging waste is considered a significant challenge majorly for retailers (LISEC et al., 
2018), it affects every player in the market. Hence, a collaborative approach is needed to 
streamline these wastes and improve packaging waste handling. The packaging waste due to 
food delivery alone in China surged from 0.2 million metric tons to 1.5 million metric tons 
in 2017 (Song et al., 2018).
If these wastes are not recycled and adequately treated, then there is a significant chance 
of them being dumped into landfills from where they may seep in to pollute the land ocean 
and alarm the lives of marine animals (Chen et al., 2017). Therefore, E-commerce firms 
have forced the packaging functions to be enforced with additional requirements of end-life 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
management and environmental sustainability (Alberto et al., 2014). Hence to be competi
tive, a supply chain has to be very responsive by responding to the orders quickly. Hence
forth, quick packaging is required and therefore avoids repackaging, sometimes resulting in 
the size of the box being more prominent than the required. Hence, an inefficient packaging 
strategy also increases packaging waste (Brinker & Gunduz, 2016).
3.3.5.2 Packaging dimensions and attributes The study was conducted on the recycling of 
various packaging materials done in individual contexts like the study of plastic packaging 
(Ross & Evans, 2003) and paper packaging (Pati et al., 2008). Likewise, Kondo et al. (2001) 
and Su et al. (2020) studied various packages from the life cycle assessment perspective. 
Nevertheless, it is different for packaging for e-commerce. Packaging could be primary, 
secondary, and tertiary (Palsson et al., 2018) and may vary between store packaging and an 
online store; for example, a book may be sold without any packaging in traditional stores. 
However, while sold through online stores, it will require separate packaging (Pålsson et al., 
2017). A typical packaging done for an online firm consists of corrugated boxes, extensive 
tape sealing, air-filled columns, bubble wrap, and plastic foam (Carlin, 2019; Chueamuang
phan et al., 2020; Tokar et al., 2021).
As Matthews et al. (2002) explained in their case study of two countries USA and Japan, 
for book packaging, the material is more required in the case of e-commerce than conven
tional stores, and hence more energy is required in the former. The packaging is required 
for food items, electronic items, and even bulkier packaging for furniture, but nothing is 
done to retrieve the packaging material. Henceforth due to the recent trends in e-commerce, 
the daily packaging material has increased worldwide (Brinker & Gunduz, 2016). There is 
a need to promote the reduction in packaging waste, encourage the Reuse of materials like 
cardboard and wood, and promote green packaging. Henceforth, e-commerce businesses 
must look for protection, handleability, security, respect for the environment, and reuse 
options in their packaging systems (Alberto et al., 2014).
The study conducted by Pålsson et al. (2017) revealed that the e-commerce channel con
sumes more energy than the conventional stores. Wang and Hu (2016) concluded that most 
e-commerce packaging materials are not recyclable, not reusable, and suggested a way for
ward for using the green packaging design. Chen et al., (2018) conducted a study to evaluate 
the refurbishing process in e-commerce logistics. They suggested a recycling process for 
packaging material and an optimum routing strategy for the distribution network.
This waste also degrades the environment. One way to reduce wastage is to use dispos
able packaging waste. Bortolini et al. (2018) studied the packaging for the fresh food sup
ply chain and debated the tradeoff between reusable and disposable packaging containers. 
Since disposable containers go to the landfills directly, reusable containers require repair
ing, which could be costly and require an initial investment. It was found that 47.1% reus
able and 52.9% as disposable is a perfect balance to achieve the objective. Maharishi et al. 
(2020), in their study focusing on the return of last-mile packaging, concluded that decen
tralized channels, when compared to centralized channels, produce fewer profits and create 
less packaging waste. Chodak (2024) also stressed that there is a need for innovative solu
tions in reusable packaging so that they are more environmentally friendly along with being 
economical. Further, a set of existing issues that are more frequently observed is listed in 
Table 8.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Packaging problems/challenges observed in E-commerce with their features/Indicators
Problems/challenges
Features/indicators
Excessive Packing/Overpacking
Non-recyclable materials
Low degree of standardization
Packaging technology
Reusable packaging
Return Packaging Material 
Network
Packaging waste and plastic con
tainers used in food delivery
Energy usage
To ensure customer satisfaction and the safety of products indulge 
in heavy packaging (Escursell et al., 2020; Kao et al., 2020; wang 
& hu, 2016)
Items such as plastic bags, foam, and adhesive tapes are polyvinyl 
chloride and are either non-degradable or take decades to degrade 
(Wang & Hu, 2016)
Scattered standards can lead to disorder stacking, packaging ineffi
ciency, and high logistics costs. (Liu et al., 2015; Wang & Hu, 2016)
Express delivery partners or e-commerce industries pay less atten
tion to packaging technology and there is a need for new technolo
gies to be adopted to optimize packaging configuration(Zennaro et 
al., 2022)
More vehicle trips, additional energy consumption in cleaning pack
aging, and RL costs (Mahmoudi & Parviziomran, 2020)
Reusable packaging should check the feasibility of economic and 
environmental aspects, logistics design, and operation manage
ment measures like inventory management, scheduling, and routing 
(Mahmoudi & Parviziomran, 2020)
The routing selection strategy, if inefficient, increases the cost of 
transportation and the procurement cost of new material (Chen et 
al., 2018)
Plastic containers used to pack food are polypropylene and Polysty
rene (Song et al., 2018)
Food packaging waste is adulterated with food residues and mixed 
with municipal solid waste. The treatment for the same is carried 
out through landfilling, incineration, illegal dumping, and open 
burning. The latter two create environmental problems (Song et al., 
2018)
More energy usage due to additional packaging (the study was done 
for the books e-commerce market)
Reason for additional usage is the multipurpose use of automobiles 
(Williams & Tagami, 2002)
3.3.5.3 Opportunities and recent advancements Sustainable packaging is definitely the way 
forward to reduce wastage and environmental degradation (Hadas et al., 2024; Muñoz-Vil
lamizar et al., 2021; Park & Waqar, 2022).The ways forward are green packaging, the bal
ance of disposable and non-disposable containers, biodegradable materials, and optimizing 
packaging waste. There are more significant opportunities to reduce the packaging material 
than to lessen its impact (Su et al., 2020). As (Brinker & Gunduz, 2016) designed an algo
rithm for optimizing packaging size using a p-median approach, 12 simple packaging strate
gies were suggested for virtual 4020 orders using the industry data, which helped reduce the 
space ratio and optimize the volumetric efficiency. When used in warehouses, the suitable 
variety and mix of shipping boxes for the packaging and shipping of orders to customers 
helps maintain profit by creating a great customer experience (Yang & Mu, 2019). Encour
agement of package-free returns (Li et al., 2022) and promoting paper and paperboard mate
rials in packaging help bring sustainability to e-commerce (Carlin, 2019). Also, the change 
in packaging material could help to dry down the environmental impact. Like the use of 
materials like cellulose, which can be found in woody and non-woody plants (Rajinipriya, 
2018), which is an abundant material (Abitbol et al., 2016; Klemm, 2018) and also a renew
able material (Cusola, 2015; Osong et al., 2016). Even bamboo as outer packaging material 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
will help reduce environmental degradation and have better average mechanical properties 
than wood (Wang & Hu, 2016). (Lai et al., 2022) suggested the reuse of packaging mate
rial through reverse logistics. A set of 13 over packaging solutions was summarized by Lu 
et al. (2020), followed by ranking the solutions on user preferences. It was concluded that 
users prefer more technologically advanced solutions, and the least preference was given to 
improving the material. Then there are also issues arising from the recent advances made in 
the packaging industry for example, intelligent packaging materials are difficult to recycle 
(Schafer & Cheung, 2018). Hence, there is a need for more comprehensive research looking 
into aspects of sustainability, logistics, operational issues, and design (Alberto et al., 2014; 
Wang & Hu, 2016). The recent advancements in packaging field are depicted in Table 9.
We can also start by incentivizing the customers to return the packaging waste by giv
ing particular money as wallet balance or free delivery service/cumulative point system 
proposed by Elgaaied-Gambier (2016). Incentivizing the firms to respond positively to the 
recycling of waste (Song et al., 2018), educating the customers about the benefit of returns, 
and creating awareness of environmental impacts (Wang et al., 2016) and mindful purchases 
((Kadam & Bochare, 2023) are the necessary steps needed to reduce wastage.Therefore, 
there is a need for e-commerce firms and logistics partners to develop and innovate in eco
friendly delivery methods, along with educating, encouraging, and incentivizing customers 
to opt for sustainable delivery choices(Villa et al., 2023).
Table 9 Recent trends and technologies used to reduce packaging waste in e-commerce
Proposed solutions
Application/Advancement in the previously used system
Reusable packaging
Last-mile delivery 
alternate solutions to 
reduce damage and 
bulkier packaging
Circular economy 
in packaging 
industry leading to 
sustainability
Green Packaging
Smart Packaging
There is a need to reduce the single-use packaging to the reusable packaging 
(Transchel et al., 2024), for e.g., Loop, a brainchild of which, for e.g., Terracy
cle, is bringing back the old milkman model where the products are delivered to 
the door. Subsequently, the emptied items are picked up, and from there, they are 
cleaned, refilled, and ready to be delivered to another customer (Makower, 2019)
Loop has Nestle, PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, and others. (Makower, 2019)
Solutions like pick-up points Locker-based automated parcel stations are used to 
give packages to customers (Morganti et al., 2014; Moroz & Polkowski, 2016)
Circular economy (CE) as a concept endorses an approach that provides an eco
nomic system with a cyclical flow model in line with sustainable development 
and economic development (Deselnicu et al., 2018; Schulze, 2016)
Application of CE in packaging could be seen in studies conducted by Hellgren 
(2017), suggesting the use of returnable and reusable materials for e-commerce 
bags; Billqvist and Glansen (2019) stressing the use of biodegradable beeswax 
for rice packaging; Arora et al. (2023) emphasized the use of resealable and 
reusable packaging materials
It should start with a supervision system to divide responsibility between firms 
and sellers for the check on the use of environmentally friendly and, at the same 
time, protective material (Guo et al., 2021; Jou et al., 2024)
Identification of green material, with an R&D team in place to meet the industry 
standards (Chunfang et al., 2019)
Smart packaging is a system that provides a packaging solution that allows 
tracking and tracing a product and acting on the changes happening inside the 
package (Schafer & Cheung, 2018; Vanderroost et al., 2014)
Its most important application area is the food industry, like detecting biosensors 
to detect pathogens in food. It could also reduce the wastage of edible products 
due to poor transportation, harvesting, or storage (Schafer & Cheung, 2018)
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
4 Synthesis and discussion: opportunities and future research scope
The RL network for e-commerce discussed so far consists of empirical, theoretical, and 
strategy based studies. It has been a mix of both qualitative and quantitative studies. Through 
discussion of RL practices in the respective themes, we presented many opportunities that 
could help to increase the RL practices, and the opportunities for research are wide open 
in these themes. A summary of the reverse use for different e-commerce uses is depicted in 
Table 10. The challenges currently are operational, regulatory, and digital, among others. 
A joint collaborative effort of academia and industry will give a boost to enhance the RL 
practices in e-commerce.
However, along with opportunities, many challenges are coming our way with changing 
technologies and increasing customer adaptability and demand for a better service. There
fore, it is time to discover more ways to enhance trust. Increasing the customer base through 
the digital medium creates more waste to be reduced, recycled, or reused for a more sustain
able environment. The various challenges, opportunities, and research gaps are discussed in 
the subsequent subsections.
4.1 Return management
● The person’s inability to physically touch or see a product is significant. When the cus
tomer finds that the product received is unable to meet the displayed product, he at
tempts to return the product, increasing the return volume. There are need for studies to 
understand the virtual assistant in trying and its impact on product return.
● Sometimes, the returned products are not even the originally ordered ones (Harris, 2010; 
Wachter et al., 2012). Some customers return excessively and abuse the return policies, 
termed opportunism or return fraud (Abdulla et al., 2019).
Table 10 Segregation of e-commerce product types along with possible reverse use
e-commerce (Differ
Subtypes
ent Product-specific 
networks)
Characteristics of the Network
Reverse use
Ex
am
ples
All in one
Food
Clothing/Apparels
Secondary Market
All types of 
products
Fresh Fruits 
& vegetables
Groceries
Ready to eat 
cooked food
Ethnic
Casual/ 
Formals
Furniture
Books
Electronics
Sells all kinds of products
Less inventory of products due to wide 
variety of products
Shelf life is 1–2 days
Shelf life varies in months
2–3 hours.
Maximum returns are just due to color 
f
itting
Could be resold with new packaging
Higher inventory than an all-in-one 
e-commerce platform as the product 
type is only specific to one product
Negotiation for price happens
Returns are difficult
Refurbish the 
products
Recycle specific 
parts
Biogas plant
Secondary market 
(Juice making 
companies)
Resell in second
ary markets
Textile waste 
recycling and 
secondary use
Itself a reuse
Am
azon, 
Ali
baba
Bon 
Bon 
Bon, 
swig
gy
Asos, 
Na
tori, 
Myn
tra
eBay, 
OLX
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
● Henceforth, customer fraudulent behavior is an important aspect of reducing returns, 
but the research underlying the specifics of this behavior is scant and needs to be ad
dressed in more length and depth in future research.
● For cases similar to this, an algorithm is proposed by Urbanke et al. (2015). The predic
tion and much-needed intervention are made by studying the consumption behavior 
of consumers who have a high product return rate to avert such transactions that will 
eventually be made in return after ordering the product. However, it is also observed that 
the nature of return fraud changes quickly, and therefore, there is a continuous need for 
model calibration with new and derived variables (John et al., 2020).
● The prevalent methodology in return management has been modelling and secondary 
data-based research. More research is needed using case studies and artificial intelli
gence-based tools.
● The research on including the social and sustainability part in return management is 
still nascent, and we highlight the need for more research on these incorporations in the 
study.
● The discussed literature does not focus much on resources and human skills. Therefore, 
more studies on training the workforce and efficient human capital utilization could 
make the return process smoother and faster.
4.2 RL challenges, current strategies, and research gaps
● The need for sustainable e-commerce network design (Bharani et al., 2024; Cano et 
al., 2022; Haryanti & Subriadi, 2022; Sarkar et al., 2024; Vieira et al., 2021) is gaining 
attention in recent times. Research has shown that reintroducing refurbished products 
into the forward supply chains has increased profitability (Difrancesco & Huchzermeier, 
2020). There is scant research on the integration of the sustainability aspect in network 
design, and this has to be done in future research.
● An integrated approach was suggested by Schrotenboer et al. (2019) to tackle large 
numbers of returns by integrating the return products with the regular picking orders 
and decomposition with the small customer orders. However, more research needs to be 
explored to highlight other means of network integration.
● Segregation could also be essential in increasing reuse and cyclicity in return items. The 
returned products are reusable or distributed into smaller pieces; the smaller compo
nents could be used in other products (Snyder & Hamdan, 2009).
● Since all the products returned should be inspected first at a centralized inspection cent
er, the subsequent decisions are taken: send it to the store, resell it to a new customer 
with new packaging, or directly send it to the trash. There is a certain high probability 
that returned items will be ordered shortly. These products could be assigned a special 
storage place in warehouses (Boysen et al., 2019). However, e-commerce firms have 
faced many returns lately, which need to be stocked in the warehouses, creating addi
tional labor demands (Schrotenboer et al., 2017).
● Hence, the significant challenges include facility location, collection center establish
ment with capacity decisions, warehouse establishment, vehicle routing route, and in
ventory management.
● Further research on planning, coordination, forecasting, and integrating other diverse 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
activities in the e-commerce supply chains will smoothen the return management pro
cess (Difrancesco et al., 2018; Shang et al., 2020). There is little research on warehouse 
management and the use of information in managing the warehouse space for e-tailers, 
and further study is needed.
● Inventory models in e-commerce could be balanced using different variants like Sale 
or Return (SOR) and outright purchase. In SOR, there is an agreement between e-com
merce and sellers for holding for a fixed duration, whereas in Outright purchase, the 
e-commerce firms are the sole owners (Das et al., 2020). There is scope for including 
various inventory models in the study, as well as how different models work for e-tailers 
and how integrating various technological aspects could make the model more robust 
and reliable in managing inventory.
● The other challenge that is gaining momentum these days is the time and damage costs. 
The refund amount is only credited once the product is returned. Hence, time forms 
a crucial factor. Hence, vehicle routing problems with time windows in e-commerce 
should be further explored.
● Research in forward e-commerce has also advanced to incorporate dynamic pricing for 
f
lexible time slots to attend home delivery (Strauss et al., 2020). The research could be 
taken forward and clubbed with return flow, where return windows are created for return 
pickup to reduce environmental emissions and transportation costs.
● Even the cross-channel or Omnichannel could be cashed in as a competitive tool (Jin et 
al., 2020; Letizia et al., 2018) as it will pool in the customers to buy online who would 
have otherwise purchased from the store only (de Leeuw et al., 2016). Additionally, 
Omni-channels retail could take advantage of the sales tax gap between online and of
f
line channels (Zhang & Choi, 2020). However, research suggests that there is a need for 
e-tailers of omnichannel to make the cross-return process more accessible and smooth 
for customers (Nageswaran et al., 2020).
● Still, the research in omnichannel is in the nascent stage, and customer behavioral as
pects concerning the Omni channels have to be investigated along with customer expec
tations in return policy and service.
● The research carried out in omnichannel returns has mostly used game theoretic models, 
and other methodological work in this area will help to further understand the dynamics 
of omnichannel returns.
● The flow of information and factual data is of absolute necessity in the case of RL for 
e-commerce as reselling probability is high in e-commerce. Therefore, research using 
information technology (IT) systems as the central theme is recommended to see the 
effect of effective IT systems in managing reverse logistics, channel and customer re
sponse, and feedback.
● The challenge of utilizing the trash received by coordinating with industries that could 
make the most of the trash and giving financial benefits should be considered and fur
ther investigated and explored for future research. Even risk management has limited 
research, and the e-tailer’s mitigation efforts and corresponding strategies could form 
a basis for further studies. Issues like the maximum hold period at the initial collec
tion centers before sending to the final collection center/warehouse need elaborative 
research.
● The opportunity in e-commerce networks is to sell the refurbished products as a differ
ent segment with a reduced price; it will help both the customers and firms. The scope 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
of research includes the secondary market in the network and how it affects the firm’s 
warehouse and inventory management. The reintegration of return processes with the 
forward supply chain of e-commerce warehouses is still rare and remains a field of study 
for future studies (Boysen et al., 2019).
● Further enhanced research on Promoting crowdsourcing solutions where taxi drivers 
(Pan et al., 2015) or other transporters could be incentivized to drop parcels and pick 
return parcels will help reduce environmental losses.
4.3 Food e-commerce: challenges and research gaps
● There is a need for food supply network management to be taken with utmost serious
ness to reduce food waste and increase sustainability for food e-commerce firms (Ekren 
et al., 2021).
● A complex problem like food waste requires a mix of technology-based solutions, direct 
intervention by the public, and an incentive structure to change consumer dumping be
havior (Kibler et al., 2018). Hence, there needs to be further research investigating the 
psychological aspects of customer return behavior, the effect of technological solutions 
and public intervention on the return behavior.
● Lateral inventory sharing among organizations could be helpful in solving inventory 
issues, and results have shown that it is helpful for tight food shelf life products (Ekren 
et al., 2021). There is a need for research on various inventory models that could be 
incorporated in a responsive supply chain that of food e-commerce.
● Also, barring a few studies, food waste management is not incorporated into the net
work, and there is a need for more research in waste utilization. Research is also needed 
to study the effects of awareness created on social media and other social platforms 
about food wastage on customer return behavior.
● Therefore, the design should include an efficient RL network for food e-commerce in
ventory policy, routing strategy, multi-compartment transportation strategy, food waste 
prevention, and utilization. The research is still in the nascent stages, and integration of 
RL food e-commerce networks with the secondary market, recycling, and recovery op
tions could be further explored along with circular economy measures.
4.4 Apparel e-commerce: challenges and research gaps
● The sale of apparel and garments through online websites and apps has created huge 
sales volumes. It has created significant sales revenues and also significant returns. The 
biggest challenge for the online apparel market is to make a tradeoff between handling 
the returns, strategizing to reduce customer returns efficiently, and increasing sales 
through RM (de Leeuw et al., 2016).
● The challenge is that while buying garments, customers prefer to have the exact size 
and variety as displayed in the platform and hence tend to order more sizes and styles 
and choose one and return the rest; this is a significant challenge for e-retailers world
wide. This could be tackled by providing accurate size, color, and size (de Leeuw et al., 
2016). This increase in return volume has created more challenges, and apart from the 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
increased transportation and handling costs, inventory is a significant concern.
● The flooding inventory of returns and the periodical orders coming into the warehouse 
create a space crunch and a severe issue for all the firms. Further research into inventory 
and its variants incorporation in the e-commerce network is recommended, emphasizing 
warehouse management.
● The challenge is to check return frauds or unauthorized returns (de Leeuw et al., 2016). 
The firms could sell the return goods in the secondary market to save space (Difrancesco 
et al., 2018). Real-time data could also be helpful to wherein the undamaged garments 
can be sent to a new customer without going back to the warehouse. Return policy of 
lesser windows may also help the firms, or a strategically planned time window may 
help to increase profit (Difrancesco et al., 2018). Hence, there is a need for more re
search on the information systems aspect of Apparel’s e-commerce network and how it 
could reduce returns.
● In developing countries like India, it is observed that half of the imported used or muti
lated garments are used for apparel aftermarket, and the rest are used as shoddy yarn to 
make carpets and blankets (Abraham, 2011). Something similar could also be explored 
for returned e-commerce apparel worldwide.
● The fashion apparel industry has a particular category: intimate apparel (Hart & Dews
nap, 2001). When Product return and recycling (PRP) is used for intimate apparel col
lection (UIAC) in the supply chain process, it could help reduce health problems as 
women are advised to change their intimate apparel for better health, and it helps bring 
in social, environmental, and economic sustainability (Choi et al., 2018). Therefore, it is 
recommended that further research incorporate secondary markets and recycling/reuse 
centers in the RL of e-commerce networks.
4.5 Packaging waste: challenges and research gaps
● As discussed in most research, the issues of packaging waste have been non-biode
gradable materials used in packaging; the box sizes are often larger than required, the 
volume of packaging waste is enormous, and in total, it is affecting the environment 
severely.
● Packaging waste is mostly seen in isolation, but for online firms, it can be studied by 
integrating the product along with packaging to have a more sustainable goal.
● Though some research has been carried out, like optimizing box sizes, promoting more 
disposable containers, and ways forward for green packaging, a lot more is to be done.
● One of the issues within the packaging is that express delivery packaging is mostly of 
nonrecyclable materials, and this issue needs more directed research.
● The scope of research is still left wide open; the practices of green packaging need more 
clarity with investments in developing countries to implement the right technology to 
achieve sustainable packaging.
● The role of government is a must, and government intervention, like a reduction in tax 
for those firms using green and sustainable packaging practices, gives an initial boost to 
the industries (Lu et al., 2020).
● Research on the Reuse of packaging materials used in e-commerce is still nascent. More 
research is to be done to achieve the sustainability and cost-effectiveness objectives 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
mentioned above.
5 Conclusion
This study delves into the comprehensive landscape of RM within the realm of e-commerce, 
examining its critical components, including RL and packaging waste. Firstly, the study 
contrasts brick-and-mortar shops with online markets, highlighting distinctions in return 
policies and network intricacies. It meticulously explores RM elements such as return ser
vices, fraud prevention, policy frameworks, handling processes, and associated costs. More
over, the study intricately weaves these aspects into their impact on customer satisfaction, 
loyalty, and purchase intent.
Extending beyond RM, the study deep dives into RL, an integral facet of RM. It dissects 
the divergences in RL processes between online and offline stores, offering nuanced impli
cations. It scrutinizes the RL network within e-commerce, focusing on specific industries 
like apparel and food. This analysis zooms in on the challenges of waste treatment and 
network optimization.
The notable significance is the examination of a pivotal discrepancy between offline 
and online stores: packaging. The study scrutinizes packaging-related issues, specifically 
addressing the surge in packaging waste. This includes a multifaceted exploration spanning 
packaging materials, standardization, and the predicament of overpackaging. Furthermore, 
considering the exponential rise in e-commerce and its corresponding packaging usage, 
the study advocates for attention to recent advancements. It emphasizes the need for solu
tions that mitigate waste, such as reusable, smart, and environmentally friendly packaging 
options. Overall, this study provides a comprehensive and insightful analysis, illuminating 
critical areas within RM, RL, and packaging waste management in the e-commerce land
scape. Its findings underscore the pressing need for innovative strategies to curb packaging 
waste in the burgeoning e-commerce industry.
Secondly, as shown in Fig. 9, the conceptual framework maps the thematic areas dis
cussed above. It will be helpful for academicians and practitioners to gain a better under
standing of the RM and RL processes and the critical areas to investigate for smoother 
processes. Moreover, this framework underscores the pivotal aspects of RL that signifi
cantly influence the RM process. It emphasizes the necessity for investments in Information 
Technology (IT), technological advancements, and managerial expertise to enhance cus
tomer service and ensure quality. Also, the framework will help to understand the features 
that affect both the customers and online markets in return management. Third, the study’s 
insights are instrumental for practitioners in shaping efficient RM systems. It sheds light on 
key focus areas for designing effective return processes, acknowledging the variability of 
RL processes based on product types. Practitioners can streamline network development by 
understanding primary barriers aligned with specific product types. Fourth, the framework 
also looks into the aspects of return packaging issues. The need for reusable packaging, 
packaging material upgradation, and incorporation of technology is stressed. There is a need 
to optimize the packaging size and reduce the packaging waste starting from the point of 
introduction into the supply chain. Ultimately, this study provides a concise yet comprehen
sive overview of published literature, serving as a valuable resource for managers seeking a 
holistic understanding of RM and RL intricacies.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 A conceptual Framework of RM in the e-commerce market
The study reviews 240 articles and comprehensively studies RM and RL processes in 
e-commerce. The descriptive study shows that the study is in the growth phase, and the 
methodology of modelling and empirical studies is preferred. The RM process is one of 
the building blocks for RL and a critical feature that distinguishes industries; an efficient 
RM process helps in customer retention and loyalty. The model of RL for e-commerce was 
studied using relevant literature. A broad network consists of saleable items like electron
ics, books, kitchen utensils, and other small items The study’s focal point revolves around 
discerning differences in Return Logistics Network Design (RLND) across various product 
categories. Notably, e-commerce platforms exhibit diverse return policies contingent upon 
product types. Consequently, the complexity magnifies due to the varied treatment and han
dling of return items associated with these policies.
The challenges discussed are many for e-commerce RL networks. Addressing food waste 
involves a multifaceted approach, necessitating technological solutions, public engagement, 
and incentive structures to alter consumer behavior (Kibler et al., 2018). Further research is 
imperative to probe into the psychological aspects influencing customer return behavior, the 
impact of technology and public intervention, and their interplay in shaping return habits. 
In the online apparel market, a significant challenge lies in balancing efficient return han
dling, strategies for reducing returns, and maximizing sales through effective RM. There’s 
a pressing need for research integrating IT advancements, such as virtual fitting, into this 
domain. The issue of packaging waste exacerbates environmental concerns, driven by non
biodegradable materials, oversized packaging, and an overwhelming volume of waste. 
More comprehensive research is necessary to delve into green packaging practices, par
ticularly directing attention and investments toward implementing sustainable technologies, 
especially in developing countries.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
This study will help researchers study the RL networks in place, adequate research gaps, 
challenges, and the opportunities we need to look forward. The collaboration of industries 
and academia could further help grow the RL practice in e-commerce industries, thereby 
reducing waste and promoting the recycling and reuse of products.
Funding There is no funding for this research work.
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by 
any of the authors.
References
Abdulla, H., Ketzenberg, M., & Abbey, J. D. (2019). Taking stock of consumer returns: A review and clas
sification of the literature. Journal of Operations Management, 65(6), 560–605.
Abitbol, T., Rivkin, A., Cao, Y., Nevo, Y., Abraham, E., Ben-Shalom, T., & Shoseyov, O. (2016). Nanocel
lulose, a tiny fiber with huge applications. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 39, 76–88.
Abraham, N. (2011). The apparel aftermarket in India–a case study focusing on reverse logistics. Journal of 
Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal.
Agrawal, S., & Singh, R. K. (2021). Outsourcing and reverse supply chain performance: A triple bottom line 
approach. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 28(4), 1146–1163.
Agrawal, S., Singh, R. K., & Murtaza, Q. (2015). A literature review and perspectives in reverse logistics. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 97, 76–92.
Ahsan, K., & Rahman, S. (2022). A systematic review of e-tail product returns and an agenda for future 
research. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 122(1), 137–166.
Ajwani-Ramchandani, R., Figueira, S., de Oliveira, R. T., Jha, S., Ramchandani, A., & Schuricht, L. (2021). 
Towards a circular economy for packaging waste by using new technologies: The case of large multina
tionals in emerging economies. Journal of Cleaner Production, 281, 125139.
Akçalı, E., & Çetinkaya, S. (2011). Quantitative models for inventory and production planning in closed-loop 
supply chains. International Journal of Production Research, 49(8), 2373–2407.
Akturk, M. S., Ketzenberg, M., & Heim, G. R. (2018). Assessing impacts of introducing ship-to-store service 
on sales and returns in omnichannel retailing: A data analytics study. Journal of Operations Manage
ment, 61, 15–45.
Alberto, R., Giulia, S., Mauro, G., & Cristina, M. (2014). A new paradigm for packaging design in web-based 
commerce. International Journal of Engineering Business Management, 6, 14.
Alshamsi, A., & Diabat, A. (2015). A reverse logistics network design. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
37, 589–598.
Alumur, S. A., Nickel, S., Saldanha-da-Gama, F., & Verter, V. (2012). Multi-period reverse logistics network 
design. European Journal of Operational Research, 220(1), 67–78.
Ambilkar, P., Dohale, V., Gunasekaran, A., & Bilolikar, V. (2022). Product returns management: A com
prehensive review and future research agenda. International Journal of Production Research, 60(12), 
3920–3944.
Anh, N. T. M., & Khoa, V. D. (2023). Impact of reverse logistics on the shopping experience of e-commerce 
customers. In International conference on research in management & technovation (pp. 473–485). Sin
gapore: Springer Nature Singapore.
Arce-Urriza, M., & Cebollada, J. (2010). A theoretical evaluation of the internet’s potential as a shopping 
channel. ESIC Market Economic and Business Journal, 135, 149–180.
Arora, T., Chirla, S. R., Singla, N., & Gupta, L. (2023). Product packaging by e-commerce platforms: Impact 
of COVID-19 and proposal for circular model to reduce the demand of virgin packaging. Circular 
Economy and Sustainability, 3(3), 1255–1273.
Bal, A., & Satoglu, S. I. (2018). A goal programming model for sustainable reverse logistics operations plan
ning and an application. Journal of Cleaner Production, 201, 1081–1091.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Barba-Gutiérrez, Y., Adenso-Diaz, B., & Gupta, S. M. (2008). Lot sizing in reverse MRP for scheduling 
disassembly. International Journal of Production Economics, 111(2), 741–751.
Barman, A. (2024). Return-refund strategy with coordination contracts in the e-commerce supply chain: a 
study under effects of digitalization and sustainable manufacturing. Electronic Commerce Research, 
1–53.
Benedito, E., & Corominas, A. (2013). Optimal manufacturing policy in a reverse logistic system with depen
dent stochastic returns and limited capacities. International Journal of Production Research, 51(1), 
189–201.
Beranek, M. (2020). Game Theoretic Analysis of State Interventions to Reduce Customer Returns in E-Com
merce. In International Conference on Computational Logistics (pp. 666–681). Springer, Cham.
Bernon, M., Upperton, J., Bastl, M., & Cullen, J. (2013). An exploration of supply chain integration in the 
retail product returns process. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-03-2012-0060
Bharani, S., Roy, S., & Tawde, S. (2024). Green products wrapped and delivered: Consumer’s preference 
for sustainable e-commerce practices. International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer 
Research, 34(3), 331–360.
Billqvist, H., & Glansén, A. (2019). This Too Shall Pass [WWW Document]. Retrieved from  h t t p : / / t o m o r r o 
w m a c h i n e . s e / # f u t u r e 
Bing, X., Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J. M., & Van der Vorst, J. G. (2014). Sustainable reverse logistics network 
design for household plastic waste. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, 26(1), 119–142.
Biswas, C., & Abdul-Kader, W. Reverse Logistics Challenges in e-Commerce.
Bortolini, M., Galizia, F. G., Mora, C., Botti, L., & Rosano, M. (2018). Bi-objective design of fresh food 
supply chain networks with reusable and disposable packaging containers. Journal of Cleaner Produc
tion, 184, 375–388.
Bower, A. B., & Maxham, J. G., III. (2012). Return shipping policies of online retailers: Normative assump
tions and the long-term consequences of fee and free returns. Journal of Marketing, 76(5), 110–124.
Boysen, N., De Koster, R., & Weidinger, F. (2019). Warehousing in the e-commerce era: A survey. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 277(2), 396–411.
Bras, B., & McIntosh, M. W. (1999). Product, process, and organizational design for remanufacture–an over
view of research. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 15(3), 167–178.
Brüel Grönberg, S., & Hulthén, K. (2022). E-commerce packaging as an embedded resource in three network 
settings. The International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research, 32(4), 450–467.
Bringezu, S., & Bleischwitz, R. (Eds.). (2017). Sustainable resource management: global trends, visions and 
policies. Routledge.
Brinker, J., & Gündüz, H. I. (2016). Optimization of demand-related packaging sizes using a p-median 
approach. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 87(5–8), 2259–2268.
Caiyi, L., Xiaoyong, L., & Zhenyu, L. (2022). The nexus between e-commerce growth and solid-waste emis
sions in china: Open the pathway of green development of e-commerce. Frontiers in Environmental 
Science, 10, 963264.
Caniato, F., Caridi, M., Crippa, L., & Moretto, A. (2012). Environmental sustainability in fashion supply 
chains: An exploratory case based research. International Journal of Production Economics, 135(2), 
659–670.
Cano, J. A., Londoño-Pineda, A., & Rodas, C. (2022). Sustainable logistics for e-commerce: A literature 
review and bibliometric analysis. Sustainability, 14(19), 12247.
Cao, F., Guo, J., & Liang, C. (2016). Multi-stage layout optimization for reverse logistics network of rural 
e-commerce under b2c mode: a case study of e-commerce enterprises on 3c products. In 2016 IEEE 
13th international conference on e-business engineering (ICEBE) (pp. 287–292). IEEE.
Carlin, C. (2019). Tokyo pack introduces innovative plastic packaging ideas from Asian exhibitors. Plastics 
Engineering, 75(1), 8–13.
Carter, C. R., & Ellram, L. M. (1998). Reverse logistics: A review of the literature and framework for future 
investigation. Journal of Business Logistics, 19(1), 85.
Chaabane, A., Ramudhin, A., & Paquet, M. (2012). Design of sustainable supply chains under the emission 
trading scheme. International Journal of Production Economics, 135(1), 37–49.
Chaleshtari, A. S., Elahi, E., Fathi, M., & Khakifirooz, M. (2022). Impact of return leniency on retailers’ 
profit and social welfare in monopoly markets. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 169, 108149.
Chen, H., Liu, S. C., & Su, T. S. (2018). The study for refurbishing process of packaging material in E-com
merce Logistics. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Service Operations and Logistics, and 
Informatics (SOLI) (pp. 80–84). IEEE.
Chen, J., Dan, B., & Shi, J. (2020a). A variable neighborhood search approach for the multi-compartment 
vehicle routing problem with time windows considering carbon emission. Journal of Cleaner Produc
tion, 277, 123932.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Chen, W. K., Chen, C. W., & Lin, Y. C. (2020b). Understanding the influence of impulse buying toward con
sumers’ post-purchase dissonance and return intention: an empirical investigation of apparel websites. 
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 1–14.
Chen, Y. S., Hung, S. T., Wang, T. Y., Huang, A. F., & Liao, Y. W. (2017). The influence of excessive product 
packaging on green brand attachment: The mediation roles of green brand attitude and green brand 
image. Sustainability, 9(4), 654.
Chileshe, N., Jayasinghe, R. S., & Rameezdeen, R. (2019). Information flow-centric approach for reverse 
logistics supply chains. Automation in Construction, 106, Article 102858.
Chodak, G. (2024). The development of different logistics solutions in E-commerce. In the future of E-com
merce: innovations and developments (pp. 25–49). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Choi, T. M., Chow, P. S., Lee, C. H., & Shen, B. (2018). Used intimate apparel collection programs: A game
theoretic analytical study. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 109, 
44–62.
Choi, T. M., Li, D., & Yan, H. (2004). Optimal returns policy for supply chain with e-marketplace. Interna
tional Journal of Production Economics, 88(2), 205–227.
Chueamuangphan, K., Kashyap, P., & Visvanathan, C. (2020). Packaging waste from e-commerce: Consum
ers’ awareness and concern. In sustainable waste management: policies and case studies (pp. 27–41). 
Springer, Singapore.
Chunfang, W., Ming, X., & Yanqiu, X. (2019). Research on Innovation and Application of Green Packaging 
Energy Saving Technology for E-commerce Logistics. In IOP conference series: earth and environmen
tal science (Vol. 242, No. 5, p. 052006). IOP Publishing.
Chung, S. S., & Zhang, C. (2011). An evaluation of legislative measures on electrical and electronic waste in 
the People’s Republic of China. Waste Management, 31(12), 2638–2646.
Cui, H., Rajagopalan, S., & Ward, A. R. (2020). Predicting product return volume using machine learning 
methods. European Journal of Operational Research, 281(3), 612–627.
Cullinane, S., Browne, M., Karlsson, E., & Wang, Y. (2019). Retail clothing returns: A review of key issues. 
Contemporary Operations and Logistics, 301–322.
Cusola, O., Valls, C., Vidal, T., & Roncero, M. B. (2015). Conferring antioxidant capacity to cellulose based 
materials by using enzymatically-modified products. Cellulose, 22(4), 2375–2390.
Das, D., & Dutta, P. (2015). Design and analysis of a closed-loop supply chain in presence of promotional 
offer. International Journal of Production Research, 53(1), 141–165.
Das, D., Kumar, R., & Rajak, M. (2020). Designing a reverse logistics network for an e-commerce firm: A 
case study. Operations and Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 13(1), 48–63.
da Silveira Guimarães, J. L., & Salomon, V. A. P. (2015). ANP applied to the evaluation of performance indi
cators of reverse logistics in footwear industry. Procedia Computer Science, 55, 139–148.
Das, K., & Chowdhury, A. H. (2012). Designing a reverse logistics network for optimal collection, recov
ery and quality-based product-mix planning. International Journal of Production Economics, 135(1), 
209–221.
Daugherty, P. J., Myers, M. B., & Richey, R. G. (2002). Information support for reverse logistics: The influ
ence of relationship commitment. Journal of Business Logistics, 23(1), 85–106.
Daultani, Y., Cheikhrouhou, N., Pratap, S., & Prajapati, D. (2022). Forward and reverse logistics network 
design with sustainability for new and refurbished products in E-commerce. Operations and Supply 
Chain Management: an International Journal, 15(4), 540–550.
Davidavičienė, V., & Al Majzoub, M. (2021). Performance of reverse logistics in electronic commerce: a case 
study from Lebanon and Syria. Transport, 1–23.
De Araújo, A. C., Matsuoka, E. M., Ung, J. E., Massote, A., & Sampaio, M. (2018). An exploratory study on 
the returns management process in an online retailer. International Journal of Logistics Research and 
Applications, 21(3), 345–362.
de Borba, J. L. G., Magalhaes, M. R. D., Filgueiras, R. S., & Bouzon, M. (2020). Barriers in omnichannel 
retailing returns: A conceptual framework. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 
49(1), 121–143.
de Campos, E. A. R., de Paula, I. C., Pagani, R. N., & Guarnieri, P. (2017). Reverse logistics for the end
of-life and end-of-use products in the pharmaceutical industry: A systematic literature review. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/scm-01-2017-0040
de Leeuw, S., Minguela-Rata, B., Sabet, E., Boter, J., & Sigurðardóttir, R. (2016). Trade-offs in managing 
commercial consumer returns for online apparel retail. International Journal of Operations & Produc
tion Management., 36(6), 710–731.
Deng, S., Li, Y., Guo, H., & Liu, B. (2016). Solving a closed-loop location-inventory-routing problem with 
mixed quality defects returns in e-commerce by hybrid ant colony optimization algorithm. Discrete 
Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2016.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
de Paula, I. C., de Campos, E. A. R., Pagani, R. N., Guarnieri, P., & Kaviani, M. A. (2019). Are collaboration 
and trust sources for innovation in the reverse logistics? Insights from a systematic literature review. 
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/scm-03-2018-0129
Deselnicu, D. C., Militāru, G., Deselnicu, V., Zăinescu, G., & Albu, L. (2018). Towards a circular econ
omy–a zero waste programme for Europe. In International conference on advanced materials and 
systems (ICAMS) (pp. 563–568). The National Research & Development Institute for Textiles and 
Leather-INCDTP.
Dhanda, K. K., & Peters, A. A. (2005). Reverse logistics in the computer industry. International Journal of 
Computer Systems and Signal Processing, 6(2), 57.
Diabat, A., Kannan, D., Kaliyan, M., & Svetinovic, D. (2013). Resources, conservation and recycling an opti
mization model for product returns using genetic algorithms and artificial immune system. Resources, 
Conservation & Recycling, 74, 156–169.
Difrancesco, R. M., & Huchzermeier, A. (2020). Multichannel retail competition with product returns: 
Effects of restocking fee legislation. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 43, 100993.
Difrancesco, R. M., Huchzermeier, A., & Schröder, D. (2018). Optimizing the return window for online 
fashion retailers with closed-loop refurbishment. Omega, 78, 205–221.
Ding, Y., & Jin, M. (2019). Service and pricing strategies in online retailing under carbon emission regula
tion. Journal of Cleaner Production, 217, 85–94.
Domina, T., & Koch, K. (1999). Consumer reuse and recycling of post-consumer textile waste. Journal of 
Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal, 3(4), 346–359.
Dominici, A., Boncinelli, F., Gerini, F., & Marone, E. (2021). Determinants of online food purchasing: The 
impact of socio-demographic and situational factors. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 60, 
102473.
Dowlatshahi, S. (2000). Developing a theory of reverse logistics. Interfaces, 30(3), 143–155.
Duan, H., Song, G., Qu, S., Dong, X., & Xu, M. (2019). Post-consumer packaging waste from express deliv
ery in China. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 144, 137–143.
Dutta, P., Das, D., Schultmann, F., & Fröhling, M. (2016). Design and planning of a closed-loop supply chain 
with three way recovery and buy-back offer. Journal of Cleaner Production, 135, 604–619.
Dutta, P., Mishra, A., Khandelwal, S., & Katthawala, I. (2020). A multiobjective optimization model for 
sustainable reverse logistics in Indian e-commerce market. Journal of Cleaner Production.  h t t p s :  / / d o i  . 
o r g / 1  0 . 1 0  1 6 / j .  j c l e p  r o . 2 0 1  9 . 1 1  9 3 4 8
Ekren, B. Y., Mangla, S. K., Turhanlar, E. E., Kazancoglu, Y., & Li, G. (2021). Lateral inventory share
based models for IoT-enabled e-commerce sustainable food supply networks. Computers & Operations 
Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2021.105237
Elgaaïed-Gambier, L. (2016). Who buys overpackaged grocery products and why? Understanding consum
ers’ reactions to overpackaging in the food sector. Journal of Business Ethics, 135(4), 683–698.
El Kihal, S., & Shehu, E. (2022). It’s not only what they buy, it’s also what they keep: Linking marketing 
instruments to product returns. Journal of Retailing, 98(3), 558–571.
Escursell, S., Llorach, P., & Roncero, M. B. (2020). Sustainability in e-commerce packaging: A review. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 124314.
FAO, G. (2011). Global food losses and food waste–Extent, causes and prevention. Save Food: An Initiative 
on Food Loss and Waste Reduction.
Ferraz, R. M., da Veiga, C. P., da Veiga, C. R. P., Furquim, T. S. G., & da Silva, W. V. (2023). After-sales attri
butes in E-commerce: A systematic literature review and future research agenda. Journal of Theoretical 
and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 18(1), 475–500.
Ferri, G. L., Chaves, G. D. L. D., & Ribeiro, G. M. (2015). Reverse logistics network for municipal solid 
waste management: The inclusion of waste pickers as a Brazilian legal requirement. Waste Manage
ment, 40, 173–191.
Fleischmann, M., Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J., Dekker, R., Van der Laan, E., van Nunen, J., & Van Wassenhove, 
L. (1997). Quantitative models for reverse logistics. European Journal of Operational Research, 103, 
1–17.
Fleischmann, M., Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J. M., Beullens, P., & Dekker, R. (2004). Reverse logistics network 
design. In Reverse logistics (pp. 65–94). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Fleischmann, M., Krikke, H. R., Dekker, R., & Flapper, S. D. P. (2000). A characterisation of logistics net
works for product recovery. Omega, 28(6), 653–666.
Fleischmann, M., Van Nunen, J. A., & Gräve, B. (2003). Integrating closed-loop supply chains and spare
parts management at IBM. Interfaces, 33(6), 44–56.
Frei, R., Jack, L., & Krzyzaniak, S. A. (2022). Mapping product returns processes in multichannel retailing: 
Challenges and opportunities. Sustainability, 14(3), 1382.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Gabe, G. (2009). The 4 pillars of e-commerce excellence, why Amazon.com has earned the "First in mind" 
advantage. Internet Marketing Driver. Retrieved January 17, 2022, from  h t t p s : / / w w w . g s q i . c o m / i m d / ? 
p = 1 7 9 1 
Galvez, D., Rakotondranaivo, A., Morel, L., Camargo, M., & Fick, M. (2015). Reverse logistics network 
design for a biogas plant: An approach based on MILP optimization and Analytical Hierarchical Process 
(AHP). Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 37, 616–623.
Gao, F., Agrawal, V. V., & Cui, S. (2022). The effect of multichannel and omnichannel retailing on physical 
stores. Management Science, 68(2), 809–826.
Gelbrich, K., Gäthke, J., & Hübner, A. (2017). Rewarding customers who keep a product: How reinforcement 
affects customers’ product return decision in online retailing. Psychology & Marketing, 34(9), 853–867.
Gharfalkar, M., Court, R., Campbell, C., Ali, Z., & Hillier, G. (2015). Analysis of waste hierarchy in the 
European waste directive 2008/98/EC. Waste Management, 39, 305–313.
Girotto, F., Alibardi, L., & Cossu, R. (2015). Food waste generation and industrial uses: A review. Waste 
Management, 45, 32–41.
Goedhart, J., Haijema, R., & Akkerman, R. (2023). Modelling the influence of returns for an omni-channel 
retailer. European Journal of Operational Research, 306(3), 1248–1263.
Govindan, K., & Bouzon, M. (2018). From a literature review to a multi-perspective framework for reverse 
logistics barriers and drivers. Journal of Cleaner Production, 187, 318–337.
Govindan, K., Palaniappan, M., Zhu, Q., & Kannan, D. (2012). Analysis of third party reverse logistics pro
vider using interpretive structural modeling. International Journal of Production Economics, 140(1), 
204–211.
Govindan, K., & Popiuc, M. N. (2014). Reverse supply chain coordination by revenue sharing contract: A 
case for the personal computers industry. European Journal of Operational Research, 233(2), 326–336.
Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., & Kannan, D. (2015). Reverse logistics and closed-loop supply chain: A com
prehensive review to explore the future. European Journal of Operational Research, 240(3), 603–626.
Griffis, S. E., Rao, S., Goldsby, T. J., & Niranjan, T. T. (2012). The customer consequences of returns in 
online retailing: An empirical analysis. Journal of Operations Management, 30(4), 282–294.
Gu, B., Fu, Y., & Li, Y. (2018). Fresh-keeping effort and channel performance in a fresh product supply chain 
with loss-averse consumers’ returns. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2018.
Guerrero-Lorente, J., Gabor, A. F., & Ponce-Cueto, E. (2020). Omnichannel logistics network design with 
integrated customer preference for deliveries and returns. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 144, 
106433.
Guide, V. D. R., Jr. (2000). Production planning and control for remanufacturing: Industry practice and 
research needs. Journal of Operations Management, 18(4), 467–483.
Guide, V. D. R., Jr., Jayaraman, V., & Srivastava, R. (1999). Production planning and control for remanufac
turing: A state-of-the-art survey. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 15(3), 221–230.
Guide, V. D. R., Jr., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2009). OR forum—the evolution of closed-loop supply chain 
research. Operations Research, 57(1), 10–18.
/ 
Guo, H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, C., Liu, Y., & Zhou, Y. (2018). Location-inventory decisions for closed-loop sup
ply chain management in the presence of the secondary market. Annals of Operations Research.  h t t p s : 
/ 
d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / s 1 0 4 7 9 - 0 1 8 - 3 0 3 9 - 0  
Guojing, X., & Ciping, J. (2010). Strategic study on reverse logistics development based on e-commerce. In 
2010 International Conference on Future Information Technology and Management Engineering (Vol. 
1, pp. 196–198). IEEE.
Guo, J., Liu, X., & Jo, J. (2017a). Dynamic joint construction and optimal operation strategy of multi-period 
reverse logistics network: A case study of Shanghai apparel e-commerce enterprises. Journal of Intel
ligent Manufacturing, 28(3), 819–831.
Guo, J., Wang, X., Fan, S., & Gen, M. (2017b). Forward and reverse logistics network and route planning 
under the environment of low-carbon emissions: A case study of Shanghai fresh food e-commerce 
enterprises. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 106, 351–360.
Guo, Y., Luo, G., & Hou, G. (2021). Research on the evolution of the express packaging recycling strat
egy, considering government subsidies and synergy benefits. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 18(3), 1144.
Gustafsson, E., Jonsson, P., & Holmström, J. (2021). Reducing retail supply chain costs of product returns 
using digital product fitting. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-10-2020-0334
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., van Otterdijk, R., & Meybeck, A. (2011). Global food losses 
and food waste: Extent, causes and prevention. FAO.
Habibi, M. K. K., Battaïa, O., Cung, V. D., & Dolgui, A. (2014, September). Integrated procurement–disas
sembly problem. In IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems 
(pp. 482–490). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Hadaś, Ł, Domański, R., Wojciechowski, H., Majewski, A., & Lewandowicz, J. (2024). The role of packag
ing in sustainable omnichannel returns—the perspective of young consumers in Poland. Sustainability, 
16(6), 2231.
Han, H., & Trimi, S. (2018). A fuzzy TOPSIS method for performance evaluation of reverse logistics in social 
commerce platforms. Expert Systems with Applications, 103, 133–145.
Harris, L. C. (2010). Fraudulent consumer returns: Exploiting retailers’ return policies. European Journal of 
Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1108/03090561011032694
Hart, C., & Dewsnap, B. (2001). An exploratory study of the consumer decision process for intimate apparel. 
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 5(2), 108–119.
Haryanti, T., & Subriadi, A. P. (2022). E-commerce acceptance in the dimension of sustainability. Journal of 
Modelling in Management, 17(2), 715–745.
Heal, G. (1977). Guarantees and risk-sharing. The Review of Economic Studies, 44(3), 549–560.
Heilig, L., Hofer, J., Lessmann, S., & Voß, S. (2016). Data-driven product returns prediction: A cloud-based 
ensemble selection approach.
He, J., Hu, H., Han, Z., He, X., & Chen, K. Storage Strategy of Reverse Logistics Repurchase Contract Based 
on Newsboy Model. In CICTP 2019 (pp. 1685–1694).
Hellgren, J. (2017). What happens to RePack after use? RePack. https://www.repack.com
He, Y., Xu, Q., & Wu, P. (2020). Omnichannel retail operations with refurbished consumer returns. Interna
tional Journal of Production Research, 58(1), 271–290.
Hjort, K., Hellström, D., Karlsson, S., & Oghazi, P. (2019). Typology of practices for managing consumer 
returns in internet retailing. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-12-2017-0368
Hjort, K., & Lantz, B. (2016). The impact of returns policies on profitability: A fashion e-commerce case. 
Journal of Business Research, 69(11), 4980–4985.
Hong, I. H., & Yeh, J. S. (2012). Modeling closed-loop supply chains in the electronics industry: A retailer 
collection application. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 48(4), 
817–829.
Hong, Y., & Pavlou, P. A. (2014). Product fit uncertainty in online markets: Nature, effects, and antecedents. 
Information Systems Research, 25(2), 328–344.
Hortaçsu, A., Martínez-Jerez, F., & Douglas, J. (2009). The geography of trade in online transactions: Evi
dence from eBay and mercadolibre. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1), 53–74.
Huang, M., & Jin, D. (2020). Impact of buy-online-and-return-in-store service on omnichannel retailing: A 
supply chain competitive perspective. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 41, 100977.
Huang, Y. C., & Yang, M. L. (2014). Reverse logistics innovation, institutional pressures and performance. 
Management Research Review, 37(7), 615–641.
Hua, Z., Hou, H., & Bian, Y. (2016). Optimal shipping strategy and return service charge under no-rea
son return policy in online retailing. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 
47(12), 3189–3206.
Hu, H. T., Ru, Y. H., Wang, R. J., & Wang, Y. K. (2010). Dynamic closed-loop supply chain network design 
based on recall and return of goods. In 2010 International Conference on Logistics Systems and Intel
ligent Management (ICLSIM) (Vol. 2, pp. 788–791). IEEE.
Hu, Z. H., Wei, C., & Yu, X. K. (2015). Apparel distribution with uncertain try-on time by evolutionary algo
rithm. International Journal of Clothing Science and Technology.
Ilgin, M. A., & Gupta, S. M. (2010). Environmentally conscious manufacturing and product recovery 
(ECMPRO): A review of the state of the art. Journal of Environmental Management, 91(3), 563–591.
Ishfaq, R., Raja, U., & Rao, S. (2016). Seller-induced scarcity and price-leadership: Impact on product 
returns in the internet retail supply chain. The International Journal of Logistics Management.
Jain, R., Aagja, J., & Bagdare, S. (2017). Customer experience–a review and research agenda. Journal of 
service theory and practice, 27(3), 642–662.
Janakiraman, N., Syrdal, H. A., & Freling, R. (2016). The effect of return policy leniency on consumer pur
chase and return decisions: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Retailing, 92(2), 226–235.
Jauhar, S. K., Chakma, B. R., Kamble, S. S., & Belhadi, A. (2023). Digital transformation technologies to 
analyze product returns in the e-commerce industry. Journal of Enterprise Information Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/jeim-09-2022-0315
Jayaraman, R., Srivastava, A., Balgi, A., Kumar, A., & Prasad, B. (2013). A study of operating practices and 
supply chains in the e-Commerce online retail businesses in India. Journal of Supply Chain Manage
ment Systems, 2(3), 33.
Jayasinghe, R. S., Chileshe, N., & Rameezdeen, R. (2019) Information-based quality management in reverse 
logistics supply chain. Benchmarking: An International Journal
Jena, S. K., & Meena, P. (2022). Shopping in the omnichannel supply chain under price competition and 
product return. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 65, 102848.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Jianyu, W., Runtong, Z., & Jun, W. (2015). Research on the distribution system in e-commerce logistics 
based on gridding management. In 2015 International Conference on Logistics, Informatics and Service 
Sciences (LISS) (pp. 1–5). IEEE.
Jindal, A., & Sangwan, K. S. (2011). Development of an interpretive structural model of barriers to reverse 
logistics implementation in Indian industry. In Glocalized solutions for sustainability in manufactur
ing (pp. 448–453). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Jin, D., Caliskan-Demirag, O., Chen, F. Y., & Huang, M. (2020). Omnichannel retailers’ return policy strate
gies in the presence of competition. International Journal of Production Economics, 225, 107595.
John, S., Shah, B. J., & Kartha, P. (2020). Refund fraud analytics for an online retail purchases. Journal of 
Business Analytics, 3(1), 56–66.
John, S. T., Sridharan, R., & Kumar, P. R. (2017). Multi-period reverse logistics network design with emis
sion cost. The International Journal of Logistics Management, 28(1), 127–149.
Joshi, P., & Visvanathan, C. (2019). Sustainable management practices of food waste in Asia: Technological 
and policy drivers. Journal of Environmental Management, 247, 538–550.
Jou, Y. T., Lo, C. Y., Mariñas, K. A., Saflor, C. S., Gutierrez, C. J., Sanchez, C., & Bucal, M. J. (2024). Assess
ing the E-Commerce sustainability readiness: A green logistics study on online sellers. Sustainability, 
16(7), 2954.
Kadam, M., & Bochare, R. (2023). Packaging waste trends in the age of sustainability: A case study of online 
shopping behaviour pre and post-COVID. Environment, Development and Sustainability.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r 
g / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / s 1 0 6 6 8 - 0 2 3 - 0 4 2 3 8 - 1  
Kao, C. K., Sun, M., Tang, Z. B., Luo, Y. P., & Zeng, F. (2020). Green manufacturing strategy of E-commerce 
express packaging in China. The International Technology Management Review, 9(1), 11–26.
Kara, S., Rugrungruang, F., & Kaebernick, H. (2007). Simulation modelling of reverse logistics networks. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 106(1), 61–69.
Karlsson, S., Oghazi, P., Hellstrom, D., Patel, P. C., Papadopoulou, C., & Hjort, K. (2023). Retail returns 
management strategy: An alignment perspective. Journal of Innovation & Knowledge, 8(4), 100420.
Kaushik, V., Kumar, A., Gupta, H., & Dixit, G. (2020). Modelling and prioritizing the factors for online 
apparel return using BWM approach. Electronic Commerce Research, 1–31.
Kaushik, V., Kumar, A., Gupta, H., & Dixit, G. (2022). Modelling and prioritizing the factors for online 
apparel return using BWM approach. Electronic Commerce Research, 1–31.
Kawa, A. (2019). Returns in E-Commerce as a value for customers from different perspectives. Business 
Logistics in Modern Management.
Keyes, D. (2020) The online grocery report: the coronavirus pandemic is thrusting online grocery into the 
spotlight in the US.  h t t p s :  / / w w w  . b u s i n  e s s i  n s i d e  r . c o m  / o n l i n  e - g r  o c e r y - r e p o r t - 2 0 2 0 .
Kibler, K. M., Reinhart, D., Hawkins, C., Motlagh, A. M., & Wright, J. (2018). Food waste and the food
energy-water nexus: A review of food waste management alternatives. Waste Management, 74, 52–62.
Kilic, H. S., Cebeci, U., & Ayhan, M. B. (2015). Reverse logistics system design for the waste of electrical 
and electronic equipment (WEEE) in Turkey. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 95, 120–132.
Kim, M., Kim, J. H., & Lennon, S. J. (2011). E‐service attributes available on men’s and women’s apparel 
web sites. Managing Service Quality: An International Journal.
Kim, Y., Kang, J., & Chun, H. (2022). Is online shopping packaging waste a threat to the environment? Eco
nomics Letters, 214, 110398.
Klemm, D., Cranston, E. D., Fischer, D., Gama, M., Kedzior, S. A., Kralisch, D., & Rauchfuss, F. (2018). 
Nanocellulose as a natural source for groundbreaking applications in materials science: Today’s state. 
Materials Today, 21(7), 720–748.
Kokkinaki, A. I., Dekker, R., De Koster, M. B. M., Pappis, C., & Verbeke, W. J. M. I. (2002). E-business 
models for reverse logistics: Contributions and challenges. In: Proceedings. International Conference 
on Information Technology: Coding and Computing (pp. 470–476). IEEE.
Kondo, Y., Hirai, K. S., Kawamoto, R., & Obata, F. (2001). A discussion on the resource circulation strategy 
of the refrigerator. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 33(3), 153–165.
Krapp, M., Nebel, J., & Sahamie, R. (2013a). Forecasting product returns in closed‐loop supply chains. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0 8 / i j p d 
l m - 0 3 - 2 0 1 2 - 0 0 7 8  
Krapp, M., Nebel, J., & Sahamie, R. (2013b). Using forecasts and managerial accounting information to 
enhance closed-loop supply chain management. Or Spectrum, 35(4), 975–1007.
Lai, N. Y. G., Kuah, A. T., Kim, C. H., & Wong, K. H. (2022). Toward sustainable express deliveries for 
online shopping: Reusing packaging materials through reverse logistics. Thunderbird International 
Business Review, 64(4), 351–362.
Lamba, D., Yadav, D. K., Barve, A., & Panda, G. (2019). Prioritizing barriers in reverse logistics of e-com
merce supply chain using fuzzy-analytic hierarchy process. Electronic Commerce Research, 1–23.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Lantz, B., & Hjort, K. (2013). Real e-customer behavioural responses to free delivery and free returns. Elec
tronic Commerce Research, 13(2), 183–198.
Laso, J., Margallo, M., García-Herrero, I., Fullana, P., Bala, A., Gazulla, C., & Aldaco, R. (2018). Combined 
application of life cycle assessment and linear programming to evaluate food waste-to-food strategies: 
Seeking for answers in the nexus approach. Waste Management, 80, 186–197.
Lee, D. H., & Dong, M. (2008). A heuristic approach to logistics network design for end-of-lease com
puter products recovery. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 44(3), 
455–474.
Lee, Y. J., Baker, T., & Jayaraman, V. (2012). Redesigning an integrated forward–reverse logistics system 
for a third party service provider: An empirical study. International Journal of Production Research, 
50(19), 5615–5634.
Lendle, A., Olarreaga, M., Schropp, S., & Vézina, P. L. (2016). There goes gravity: EBay and the death of 
distance. The Economic Journal, 126(591), 406–441.
Letizia, P., Pourakbar, M., & Harrison, T. (2018). The impact of consumer returns on the multichannel sales 
strategies of manufacturers. Production and Operations Management, 27(2), 323–349.
Li, D., Ignatius, J., Wang, D., Yin, Y., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2024). A branch-and-price-and-cut algorithm for 
the truck-drone routing problem with simultaneously delivery and pickup. Naval Research Logistics 
(NRL), 71(2), 241–285.
Li, J., He, J., & Zhu, Y. (2018). E-tail product return prediction via hypergraph-based local graph cut. In: 
Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data 
Mining (pp. 519–527).
Lin, D., Lee, C. K. M., Siu, M. K., Lau, H., & Choy, K. L. (2020). Analysis of customers’ return behaviour 
after online shopping in China using SEM. Industrial Management & Data Systems.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 
. 
1 1 0 8 / i m d s - 0 5 - 2 0 1 9 - 0 2 9 6  
Lin, G., Chang, H., Li, X., Li, R., & Zhao, Y. (2022). Integrated environmental impacts and C-footprint 
reduction potential in treatment and recycling of express delivery packaging waste. Resources, Conser
vation and Recycling, 179, 106078.
Lisec, A., Antić, S., Campuzano-Bolarín, F., & Pejić, V. (2018). An approach to packaging waste reverse 
logistics: Case of Slovenia. Transport, 33(5), 1104–1112.
Liu, D. (2014). Network site optimization of reverse logistics for E-commerce based on genetic algorithm. 
Neural Computing and Applications, 25(1), 67–71.
Liu, J., & Xiong, H. (2023). Information disclosure, consumer returns, and operational costs in omnichannel 
retailing. Naval Research Logistics (NRL), 70(4), 376–391.
Liu, S. Y., Feng, H. J., Xiang, H., Fan, X. P., & Yue, S. L. (2015). Problems and solutions for E-Commerce 
logistic packaging. Packaging Engineering, 36(3), 144–148.
Liu, Y., Xiao, Y., & Dai, Y. (2023). Omnichannel retailing with different order fulfillment and return options. 
International Journal of Production Research, 61(15), 5053–5074.
Li, X., & Olorunniwo, F. (2008). An exploration of reverse logistics practices in three companies. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 13(5), 381–386.
Li, Y., Martínez-López, F. J., Feng, C., & Chen, Y. (2022). Green communication for more package-free ecom
merce returns. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 17(4), 1450–1472.
Li, Y., Xu, L., & Li, D. (2013). Examining relationships between the return policy, product quality, and pric
ing strategy in online direct selling. International Journal of Production Economics, 144(2), 451–460.
Li, Z., Yang, W., & Chen, X. (2021). Omnichannel inventory models accounting for Buy-Online–Return-to
Store service and random demand. Soft Computing, 25(17), 11691–11710.
Luo, Y., Wan, F., & Zhao, H. (2012). Research on facility location of re-manufacturing network based on 
MILP. Industrial Engineering and Management, 17(5), 16–28.
Lu, S., Yang, L., Liu, W., & Jia, L. (2020). User preference for electronic commerce overpackaging solutions: 
Implications for cleaner production. Journal of Cleaner Production, 258, 120936.
Ma, B., Mao, B., Liu, S., Meng, F., & Liu, J. (2024). Managing physical inventory and return policies in 
omnichannel retailing. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 109986.
Ma, F. (2010). The study on reverse logistics for e-commerce. In 2010 International Conference on Manage
ment and Service Science (pp. 1–4). IEEE.
Mahaboob Sheriff, K. M., Gunasekaran, A., & Nachiappan, S. (2012). Reverse logistics network design: A 
review on strategic perspective. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 12(2), 
171–194.
Mahmoudi, M., & Parviziomran, I. (2020). Reusable packaging in supply chains: A review of environmental 
and economic impacts, logistics system designs, and operations management. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 228, 107730.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Makower, J. (2019, January 24). Loop’s launch brings reusable packaging to the world’s biggest brands. 
Trellis. Retrieved January19, 2026, from  h t t p s :  / / t r e  l l i s . n  e t / a  r t i c l  e / l o o  p s - l a u  n c h -  b r i n g  s - r e u  s a b l e -  p a c k  a 
g i n g - w o r l d s - b i g g e s t - b r a n d s /
Mallari, C. B., San Juan, J. L., & Bongo, M. (2023). Modelling the vehicle routing problem with delivery and 
pickup in e-commerce forward-reverse logistics networks based on the triple bottom line framework. 
Chemical Engineering Transactions, 103, 463–468.
Mandal, P., Basu, P., & Saha, K. (2021). Forays into omnichannel: An online retailer’s strategies for manag
ing product returns. European Journal of Operational Research, 292(2), 633–651.
Mangiaracina, R., Marchet, G., Perotti, S., & Tumino, A. (2015). A review of the environmental implications 
of B2C e-commerce: A logistics perspective. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-06-2014-0133
Martínez-López, F. J., Feng, C., Li, Y., & Mata, M. S. (2022). Restoring the buyer–seller relationship through 
online return shipping: The role of return shipping method and return shipping fee. Electronic Com
merce Research and Applications, 54, 101170.
Martínez-López, F. J., Li, Y., Feng, C., Liu, H., & López-López, D. (2023). Reducing ecommerce returns with 
return credits. Electronic Commerce Research, 23(4), 2011–2033.
Matthews, H. S., Williams, E., Tagami, T., & Hendrickson, C. T. (2002). Energy implications of online book 
retailing in the United States and Japan. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 22(5), 493–507.
Mayring, P. (2010). Qualitative Content Analysis: foundations and techniques. Handbook of qualitative tech
niques in psychology. 11th edn. Weinheim: Beltz, 84–85.
Mazumder, S., & Elliott, G. (2020). The four pillars of Ecommerce profitability: Publicis Sapient. The Four 
Pillars of Ecommerce Profitability | Publicis Sapient. Retrieved January 17, 2022, from  h t t p s :  / / w w w  . p u 
b l i  c i s s  a p i e n  t . c o m  / i n s i g  h t s /  t h e - f  o u r - p  i l l a r s  - o f -  e - c o m m e r c e - p r o fi  t a b i l i t y
McLeod, F., Hickford, A., Maynard, S., Cherrett, T., & Allen, J. (2008). Developing innovative and more 
sustainable approaches to reverse logistics for the collection, recycling and disposal of waste products 
from urban centres: literature review and identification of opportunities.
Meade, L., Sarkis, J., & Presley, A. (2007). The theory and practice of reverse logistics. International Journal 
of Logistics Systems and Management, 3(1), 56–84.
Meherishi, L., Narayana, S. A., & Ranjani, K. S. (2020). Integrated product and packaging decisions with 
secondary packaging returns and protective packaging management. European Journal of Operational 
Research.
Meredith, J. (1993). Theory building through conceptual methods. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 13(5), 3–11.
Millet, D. (2011). Designing a sustainable reverse logistics channel: The 18 generic structures framework. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 19(6–7), 588–597.
Misra, S., & Arivazhagan, D. (2017). Application of design thinking techniques in marketing of fashion 
apparel e-commerce. Indian Journal of Marketing, 47(8), 18–30.
Mollenkopf, D. A., Frankel, R., & Russo, I. (2011). Creating value through returns management: Exploring 
the marketing–operations interface. Journal of Operations Management, 29(5), 391–403.
Mollenkopf, D. A., Rabinovich, E., Laseter, T. M., & Boyer, K. K. (2007). Managing internet product returns: 
A focus on effective service operations. Decision Sciences, 38(2), 215–250.
Mondal, C., & Giri, B. C. (2022). Analyzing strategies in a green e-commerce supply chain with return policy 
and exchange offer. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 171, 108492.
Morganti, E., Dablanc, L., & Fortin, F. (2014). Final deliveries for online shopping: The deployment of 
pickup point networks in urban and suburban areas. Research in Transportation Business & Manage
ment, 11, 23–31.
Moroz, M., & Polkowski, Z. (2016). The last mile issue and urban logistics: Choosing parcel machines in 
the context of the ecological attitudes of the Y generation consumers purchasing online. Transportation 
Research Procedia, 16, 378–393.
Moyo, D. (2021). Packaging waste and their management technologies. In Waste Management in the Fashion 
and Textile Industries (pp. 145–155). Woodhead Publishing.
Muñoz-Villamizar, A., Velázquez-Martínez, J. C., Haro, P., Ferrer, A., & Mariño, R. (2021). The environmen
tal impact of fast shipping ecommerce in inbound logistics operations: A case study in Mexico. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 283, 125400.
Nageswaran, L., Cho, S. H., & Scheller-Wolf, A. (2020). Consumer return policies in omnichannel opera
tions. Management Science, 66(12), 5558–5575.
Nanayakkara, P. R., Jayalath, M. M., Thibbotuwawa, A., & Perera, H. N. (2022). A circular reverse logistics 
framework for handling e-commerce returns. Cleaner Logistics and Supply Chain, 5, 100080.
Narang, U., & Shankar, V. (2019). Mobile app introduction and online and offline purchases and product 
returns. Marketing Science, 38(5), 756–772.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Naseem, M. H., Yang, J., & Xiang, Z. (2021). Prioritizing the solutions to reverse logistics barriers for the 
e-commerce industry in Pakistan based on a fuzzy ahp-topsis approach. Sustainability, 13(22), 12743.
Naseri, M. B., & Elliott, G. (2011). Role of demographics, social connectedness and prior internet experience 
in adoption of online shopping: Applications for direct marketing. Journal of Targeting, Measurement 
and Analysis for Marketing, 19(2), 69–84.
Nath, O., Kumar, S., Sharma, V., Meena, M. L., & Jain, R. (2023). Design of strategic framework for green 
sustainable practices in e-commerce companies. Materials Today: Proceedings.
Nel, J. D., & Badenhorst, A. (2020). A conceptual framework for reverse logistics challenges in e-commerce. 
International Journal of Business Performance Management, 21(1–2), 114–131.
Niknejad, A., & Petrovic, D. (2014). Optimisation of integrated reverse logistics networks with different 
product recovery routes. European Journal of Operational Research, 238(1), 143–154.
Ni, M., & Liao, R. H. (2009). Four types of reverse logistics model based on e-commerce environment. 
Journal of E-Business, 53(18), 137–139.
Nogueira, G. P. M., de Assis Rangel, J. J., Croce, P. R., & Peixoto, T. A. (2022). The environmental impact 
of fast delivery B2C e-commerce in outbound logistics operations: A simulation approach. Cleaner 
Logistics and Supply Chain, 5, 100070.
Oghazi, P., Karlsson, S., Hellström, D., & Hjort, K. (2018). Online purchase return policy leniency and 
purchase decision: Mediating role of consumer trust. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 41, 
190–200.
Orendorff, A. (2019). The state of the ecommerce fashion industry: Statistics, trends & strategy. Preuzeto, 
13, 2019.
Osong, S. H., Norgren, S., & Engstrand, P. (2016). Processing of wood-based microfibrillated cellulose and 
nanofibrillated cellulose, and applications relating to papermaking: A review. Cellulose, 23(1), 93–123.
Pan, S., Chen, C., & Zhong, R. Y. (2015). A crowdsourcing solution to collect e-commerce reverse flows in 
metropolitan areas. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(3), 1984–1989.
Papargyropoulou, E., Lozano, R., Steinberger, J. K., Wright, N., & bin Ujang, Z. (2014). The food waste 
hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and food waste. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 76, 106–115.
Park, J., & Waqar, Z. (2022). Life cycle assessment of returnable mailers used for apparel electronic com
merce: A case study in Canada. Packaging Technology and Science, 35(9), 651–662.
Patel, P. C., Baldauf, C., Karlsson, S., & Oghazi, P. (2021). The impact of free returns on online purchase 
behavior: Evidence from an intervention at an online retailer. Journal of Operations Management, 
67(4), 511–555.
Pati, R. K., Vrat, P., & Kumar, P. (2008). A goal programming model for paper recycling system. Omega, 
36(3), 405–417.
Pei, Z., & Paswan, A. (2018). Consumers’legitimate and opportunistic product return behaviors in online 
shopping. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 19(4), 301–319.
Pei, Z., Paswan, A., & Yan, R. (2014). E-tailer׳ s return policy, consumer׳ s perception of return policy fair
ness and purchase intention. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 21(3), 249–257.
Peng, Y., Liu, Y., & Ablanedo-Rosas, J. H. (2022). Store density in omnichannel implementation while con
sidering the environmental impact of packaging materials. Journal of Cleaner Production, 371, 133668.
Pinheiro, E., de Francisco, A. C., Piekarski, C. M., & de Souza, J. T. (2019). How to identify opportunities 
for improvement in the use of reverse logistics in clothing industries? A case study in a Brazilian cluster. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 210, 612–619.
Pinos, J., Hahladakis, J. N., & Chen, H. (2022). Why is the generation of packaging waste from express 
deliveries a major problem? Science of the Total Environment, 830, 154759.
Pishvaee, M. S., Jolai, F., & Razmi, J. (2009). A stochastic optimization model for integrated forward/reverse 
logistics network design. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 28(4), 107–114.
Pålsson, H. (2018). Packaging Logistics: Understanding and managing the economic and environmental 
impacts of packaging in supply chains. Kogan Page Publishers.
Pålsson, H., Pettersson, F., & Hiselius, L. W. (2017). Energy consumption in e-commerce versus conven
tional trade channels-Insights into packaging, the last mile, unsold products and product returns. Jour
nal of Cleaner Production, 164, 765–778.
Pokharel, S., & Mutha, A. (2009). Perspectives in reverse logistics: A review. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 53(4), 175–182.
Policarpo, L. M., da Silveira, D. E., da Rosa Righi, R., Stoffel, R. A., da Costa, C. A., Barbosa, J. L. V., & 
Arcot, T. (2021). Machine learning through the lens of e-commerce initiatives: An up-to-date systematic 
literature review. Computer Science Review, 41, 100414.
Posselt, T., Gerstner, E., & Radic, D. (2008). Rating e-tailers’ money-back guarantees. Journal of Service 
Research, 10(3), 207–219.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Prahinski, C., & Kocabasoglu, C. (2006). Empirical research opportunities in reverse supply chains. Omega, 
34(6), 519–532.
Prajapati, D., Chan, F. T., Daultani, Y., & Pratap, S. (2022). Sustainable vehicle routing of agro-food grains in 
the e-commerce industry. International Journal of Production Research, 60(24), 7319–7344.
Prajapati, D., Kumar, M. M., Pratap, S., Chelladurai, H., & Zuhair, M. (2021a). Sustainable logistics network 
design for delivery operations with time horizons in B2B e-commerce platform. Logistics, 5(3), 61.
Prajapati, D., Zhou, F., Zhang, M., Chelladurai, H., & Pratap, S. (2021b). Sustainable logistics network 
design for multi-products delivery operations in B2B e-commerce platform. Sādhanā, 46(2), 100.
Pratap, S., Daultani, Y., Dwivedi, A., & Zhou, F. (2021). Supplier selection and evaluation in e-commerce 
enterprises: A data envelopment analysis approach. Benchmarking: An International Journal.  h t t p s : / / d 
o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 0 8 / b i j - 1 0 - 2 0 2 0 - 0 5 5 6  
Qiang, Q., Ke, K., Anderson, T., & Dong, J. (2013). The closed-loop supply chain network with competition, 
distribution channel investment, and uncertainties. Omega, 41(2), 186–194.
Qiu, R., Ma, L., & Sun, M. (2023). A robust omnichannel pricing and ordering optimization approach 
with return policies based on data-driven support vector clustering. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 305(3), 1337–1354.
Rabinovich, E., Sinha, R., & Laseter, T. (2011). Unlimited shelf space in Internet supply chains: Treasure 
trove or wasteland? Journal of Operations Management, 29(4), 305–317.
Rachih, H., Mhada, F. Z., & Chiheb, R. (2019). Meta-heuristics for reverse logistics: A literature review and 
perspectives. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 127, 45–62.
Radhi, M., & Zhang, G. (2019). Optimal cross-channel return policy in dual-channel retailing systems. Inter
national Journal of Production Economics, 210, 184–198.
Rajasekaran, V., & Priyadarshini, R. (2021). An E-Commerce Prototype for Predicting the Product Return 
Phenomenon Using Optimization and Regression Techniques. In International Conference on Advances 
in Computing and Data Sciences (pp. 230–240). Springer, Cham.
Rajinipriya, M., Nagalakshmaiah, M., Robert, M., & Elkoun, S. (2018). Importance of agricultural and indus
trial waste in the field of nanocellulose and recent industrial developments of wood based nanocellu
lose: A review. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 6(3), 2807–2828.
Ramanathan, R. (2011). An empirical analysis on the influence of risk on relationships between handling of 
product returns and customer loyalty in e-commerce. International Journal of Production Economics, 
130(2), 255–261.
Rao, S., Lee, K. B., Connelly, B., & Iyengar, D. (2018). Return time leniency in online retail: A signaling 
theory perspective on buying outcomes. Decision Sciences, 49(2), 275–305.
Rao, S., Rabinovich, E., & Raju, D. (2014). The role of physical distribution services as determinants of 
product returns in Internet retailing. Journal of Operations Management, 32(6), 295–312.
Risberg, A. (2023). A systematic literature review on e-commerce logistics: Towards an e-commerce and 
omni-channel decision framework. The International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer 
Research, 33(1), 67–91.
Röllecke, F. J., Huchzermeier, A., & Schröder, D. (2018). Returning customers: The hidden strategic oppor
tunity of returns management. California Management Review, 60(2), 176–203.
Rodríguez, P. G., Villarreal, R., Valiño, P. C., & Blozis, S. (2020). A PLS-SEM approach to understanding 
E-SQ, E-Satisfaction and E-Loyalty for fashion E-Retailers in Spain. Journal of Retailing and Con
sumer Services, 57, 102201.
Rogers, D. S., Lambert, D. M., Croxton, K. L., & García-Dastugue, S. J. (2002). The returns management 
process. The International Journal of Logistics Management, 13(2), 1–18.
Rogers, D. S., Lembke, R., & Benardino, J. (2013). Reverse logistics: A new core competency. Supply Chain 
Management Review, 17(3).
Rogers, D. S., & Tibben‐Lembke, R. (2001). An examination of reverse logistics practices. Journal of busi
ness logistics, 22(2), 129–148.
Rogers, D. S., & Tibben-Lembke, R. S. (1999). Going backwards: reverse logistics trends and practices (Vol. 
2). Pittsburgh, PA: Reverse Logistics Executive Council.
Roghanian, E., & Pazhoheshfar, P. (2014). An optimization model for reverse logistics network under sto
chastic environment by using genetic algorithm. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 33(3), 348–356. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2014.02.007
Ross, S., & Evans, D. (2003). The environmental effect of reusing and recycling a plastic-based packaging 
system. Journal of Cleaner Production, 11(5), 561–571.
Rubio, S., Chamorro, A., & Miranda, F. J. (2008). Characteristics of the research on reverse logistics (1995
2005). International Journal of Production Research, 46(4), 1099–1120.
Saastamoinen, J. (2009). Returns on reputation in retail e-commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research, 10(4), 196–219.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Sahoo, N., Dellarocas, C., & Srinivasan, S. (2018). The impact of online product reviews on product returns. 
Information Systems Research, 29(3), 723–738.
Saleh, K.: E-commerce product return rate - statistics and trends [infographic].  h t t p s :  / / w w w  . i n v e s  p c r o  . c o m /  b 
l 
o g /  e - c o m m  e r c e  - p r o d  u c t - r  e t u r n -  r a t e  - s t a t i s t i c s / .
Salemdeeb, R., Zu Ermgassen, E. K., Kim, M. H., Balmford, A., & Al-Tabbaa, A. (2017). Environmental and 
health impacts of using food waste as animal feed: A comparative analysis of food waste management 
options. Journal of Cleaner Production, 140, 871–880.
Samar, K. M., & Robert, S. (2004). Reverse logistics in e-business. Optimal price and return policy. Interna
tional Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 34(1), 70–89.
Sangwan, K. S. (2017). Key activities, decision variables and performance indicators of reverse logistics. 
Procedia CIRP, 61, 257–262.
Santana, J. C. C., Guerhardt, F., Franzini, C. E., Ho, L. L., Júnior, S. E. R. R., Cânovas, G., & Berssaneti, F. 
T. (2021). Refurbishing and recycling of cell phones as a sustainable process of reverse logistics: A case 
study in Brazil. Journal of Cleaner Production, 283, 124585.
Sarkar, M. K., Rao, A. C., & Singh, A. K. (2024). Sustainability and talent management”: A two-pronged 
approach for the evolution of E-commerce in India. Circular Economy and Sustainability, 4(1), 267–285.
Sasikumar, P., & Kannan, G. (2008a). Issues in reverse supply chains, part I: End-of-life product recovery and 
inventory management–an overview. International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, 1(3), 154–172.
Sasikumar, P., & Kannan, G. (2008b). Issues in reverse supply chains, part II: Reverse distribution issues–an 
overview. International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, 1(4), 234–249.
Sasikumar, P., & Kannan, G. (2009). Issues in reverse supply chain, part III: Classification and simple analy
sis. International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, 2(1), 2–27.
Schaefer, D., & Cheung, W. M. (2018). Smart packaging: Opportunities and challenges. Procedia CIRP, 72, 
1022–1027.
Schrotenboer, A. H., Wruck, S., Roodbergen, K. J., Veenstra, M., & Dijkstra, A. S. (2017). Order picker rout
ing with product returns and interaction delays. International Journal of Production Research, 55(21), 
6394–6406.
Schrotenboer, A. H., Wruck, S., Vis, I. F., & Roodbergen, K. J. (2019). Integration of returns and decomposi
tion of customer orders in e-commerce warehouses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01794.
Schulze, G. (2016). Growth Within: A Circular Economy Vision for a Competitive Europe. Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation and the McKinsey Center for Business and Environment, 1–22.
Shang, G., Ferguson, M. E., & Galbreth, M. R. (2019). Where should i focus my return reduction efforts? 
Empirical guidance for retailers. Decision Sciences, 50(4), 877–909.
Shang, G., McKie, E. C., Ferguson, M. E., & Galbreth, M. R. (2020). Using transactions data to improve 
consumer returns forecasting. Journal of Operations Management, 66(3), 326–348.
Shang, G., Pekgün, P., Ferguson, M., & Galbreth, M. (2017). How much do online consumers really value 
free product returns? Evidence from eBay. Journal of Operations Management, 53, 45–62.
Shehu, E., Papies, D., & Neslin, S. A. (2020). Free shipping promotions and product returns. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 57(4), 640–658.
Shen, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhang, Z., & Ma, X. (2022). Omnichannel retailing return operations with consumer 
disappointment aversion. Operations Research Perspectives, 9, 100253.
Shi, X., Dong, C., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2018). Does the buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store strategy with pre
orders benefit a retailer with the consideration of returns? International Journal of Production Econom
ics, 206, 134–145.
Shi, X., Li, L. X., Yang, L., Li, Z., & Choi, J. Y. (2012). Information flow in reverse logistics: An industrial 
information integration study. Information Technology and Management, 13(4), 217–232.
Shi, Y., Nie, J., Qu, T., Chu, L. K., & Sculli, D. (2015). Choosing reverse channels under collection responsi
bility sharing in a closed-loop supply chain with re-manufacturing. Journal of Intelligent Manufactur
ing, 26(2), 387–402.
Snyder, R., & Hamdan, B. (2009). E-commerce and Inventory Management. In Proceedings of ASBBS 
Annual Conference. Vol. 16. No 1, Las Vegas, February.
Song, G., Zhang, H., Duan, H., & Xu, M. (2018). Packaging waste from food delivery in China’s mega cities. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 130, 226–227.
Srivastava, S. K. (2007). Green supply‐chain management: A state‐of‐the‐art literature review. International 
Journal of Management Reviews, 9(1), 53–80.
Stöcker, B., Baier, D., & Brand, B. M. (2021). New insights in online fashion retail returns from a customers’ 
perspective and their dynamics. Journal of Business Economics, 91(8), 1149–1187.
Stock, J. R., & Mulki, J. P. (2009). Product returns processing: An examination of practices of manufacturers, 
wholesalers/distributors, and retailers. Journal of Business Logistics, 30(1), 33–62.
Stock, J., Speh, T., & Shear, H. (2002). Many happy (product) returns.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Strauss, A., Gülpınar, N., & Zheng, Y. (2020). Dynamic pricing of flexible time slots for attended home 
delivery. European Journal of Operational Research.
Subramoniam, R., Huisingh, D., & Chinnam, R. B. (2009). Remanufacturing for the automotive aftermarket
strategic factors: Literature review and future research needs. Journal of Cleaner Production, 17(13), 
1163–1174.
Subulan, K., Taşan, A. S., & Baykasoğlu, A. (2015). Designing an environmentally conscious tire closed
loop supply chain network with multiple recovery options using interactive fuzzy goal programming. 
Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39(9), 2661–2702.
Sun, K., Liu, Y., & Li, X. (2024). Mail back or in-store dropoff? Optimal design of product-exchange policies 
in omnichannel retailing systems. Omega, 125, 103024.
Sun, M., & Zhao, J. (2022). Behavioral patterns beyond posting negative reviews online: An empirical view. 
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 17(3), 949–983.
Su, Y., Duan, H., Wang, Z., Song, G., Kang, P., & Chen, D. (2020). Characterizing the environmental impact 
of packaging materials for express delivery via life cycle assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
274, 122961.
Takata, M., Fukushima, K., Kino-Kimata, N., Nagao, N., Niwa, C., & Toda, T. (2012). The effects of recy
cling loops in food waste management in Japan: Based on the environmental and economic evaluation 
of food recycling. Science of the Total Environment, 432, 309–317.
Thibbotuwawa, A., Nanayakkara, P. R., Fernando, W. M., Jayalath, M. M., Perera, H. N., & Nielsen, P. 
(2023). A reverse logistics network model for handling E-commerce returns. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 
56(2), 138–143.
Thi, N. B. D., Kumar, G., & Lin, C. Y. (2015). An overview of food waste management in developing coun
tries: Current status and future perspective. Journal of Environmental Management, 157, 220–229.
Titiyal, R., Bhattacharya, S., & Thakkar, J. J. (2020). E-fulfillment performance evaluation for an e-tailer: A 
DANP approach. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 69(4), 741–773.
Tokar, T., Jensen, R., & Williams, B. D. (2021). A guide to the seen costs and unseen benefits of e-commerce. 
Business Horizons, 64(3), 323–332.
Transchel, S., Taheri-Bavil-Oliaei, M., & Petersen, M. (2024). Reusable packaging for B2C supply chains. 
Sustainable supply chains: A research-based textbook on operations and strategy (pp. 405–431). 
Springer International Publishing.
Tsang, Y. P., Wu, C. H., Lam, H. Y., Choy, K. L., & Ho, G. T. S. (2020). Integrating Internet of Things and 
multi-temperature delivery planning for perishable food E-commerce logistics: A model and applica
tion. International Journal of Production Research.  h t t p s :   /  / d o  i . o r  g /  1 0 .  1 0  8 0 /  0 0 2 0 7   5 4 3 . 2   0 2 0 .  1 8 4 1 3 1 5
UNION, P. (2008). Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 
on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe. Official Journal of the European Union, 152, 1–44.
Urbanke, P., Kranz, J., & Kolbe, L. (2015). Predicting product returns in e-commerce: the contribution of 
mahalanobis feature extraction.
Vanderroost, M., Ragaert, P., Devlieghere, F., & De Meulenaer, B. (2014). Intelligent food packaging: The 
next generation. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 39(1), 47–62.
Van Wassenhove, L. N., & Besiou, M. (2013). Complex problems with multiple stakeholders: How to bridge 
the gap between reality and OR/MS? Journal of Business Economics, 83(1), 87–97.
Velazquez, R., & Chankov, S. M. (2019). Environmental impact of last mile deliveries and returns in fashion 
E-commerce: a cross-case analysis of six retailers. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Industrial 
Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM) (pp. 1099–1103). IEEE.
Vieira, M., Malaquias, T., Ketsmur, V., Ketsmur, V., & Au-Yong-Oliveira, M. (2021). Towards a More 
Sustainable E-commerce in the Post-COVID-19 Recovery of Portuguese Companies. In Advanced 
Research in Technologies, Information, Innovation and Sustainability: First International Conference, 
ARTIIS 2021, La Libertad, Ecuador, November 25–27, 2021, Proceedings 1 (pp. 600–613). Springer 
International Publishing.
Vilar-Zanón, J. L., Vilar, E., & Heras, A. (2017). Online product returns risk assessment and management. 
TOP, 25(3), 445–466.
Villa, R., Serrano, M., García, T., & González, G. (2023). To green or not to green: The E-Commerce-deliv
ery question. Sustainability, 15(16), 12161.
Vlachos, I. P. (2014). Reverse food logistics during the product life cycle. International Journal of Integrated 
Supply Management, 9(1–2), 49–73.
Wachter, K., Vitell, S. J., Shelton, R. K., & Park, K. (2012). Exploring consumer orientation toward returns: 
Unethical dimensions. Business Ethics: A European Review, 21(1), 115–128.
Walsh et al., 2016 Walsh, G., Albrecht, A. K., Kunz, W., & Hofacker, C. F. (2016). Relationship between 
online retailers’ reputation and product returns.British Journal of Management, 27(1), 3-20.
Walsh, G., & Brylla, D. (2017). Do product returns hurt relational outcomes? Some evidence from online 
retailing. Electronic Markets, 27(4), 329–339.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Walsh, G., Hennig-Thurau, T., Sassenberg, K., & Bornemann, D. (2010). Does relationship quality matter in 
e-services? A comparison of online and offline retailing. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 
17(2), 130–142.
Walsh, G., & Möhring, M. (2017). Effectiveness of product return-prevention instruments: Empirical evi
dence. Electronic Markets, 27(4), 341–350.
Wang, C. N., Dang, T. T., & Nguyen, N. A. T. (2021). Outsourcing reverse logistics for e-commerce retailers: 
A two-stage fuzzy optimization approach. Axioms, 10(1), 34.
Wang, F., & Hu, Y. (2016). Research on green express packaging design under the electronic commerce. 
Open Journal of Business and Management, 4(4), 621–628.
Wang, J. J., Chen, H., Rogers, D. S., Ellram, L. M., & Grawe, S. J. (2017). A bibliometric analysis of reverse 
logistics research (1992–2015) and opportunities for future research. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management.
Wang, L., Elahi, E., Zhou, Y., Wang, L., & Zhang, S. (2022). A review of packaging materials’ consumption 
regulation and pollution control. Sustainability, 14(23), 15866.
Wang, W. (2015). A decision method for returns logistics based on the customer’s behaviour in e-commerce. 
Procedia Computer Science, 60, 1506–1515.
Wang, X., Xie, J., & Fan, Z. P. (2020). B2C cross-border E-commerce logistics mode selection considering 
product returns. International Journal of Production Research, 1–20.
Wang, Y., Anderson, J., Joo, S. J., & Huscroft, J. R. (2019). The leniency of return policy and consumers’ 
repurchase intention in online retailing. Industrial Management & Data Systems.
Wang, Y., Sun, M., Yang, X., & Yuan, X. (2016). Public awareness and willingness to pay for tackling smog 
pollution in China: A case study. Journal of Cleaner Production, 112, 1627–1634.
Wang, Y., & Zhu, Q. (2020). How do you manage online delivery package waste? IEEE Engineering Man
agement Review, 48(2), 184–192.
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature review. 
MIS Quarterly, xiii-xxiii.
Wei, H., & Dong, M. (2019). Import-export freight organization and optimization in the dry-port-based cross
border logistics network under the Belt and Road Initiative. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 130, 
472–484.
Weiland, D. (2017). The role of information in e-commerce. Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego. 
Ekonomika Transportu i Logistyka, 68, 103–115.
Williams, E., & Tagami, T. (2002). Energy use in sales and distribution via e-commerce and conventional 
retail: A case study of the Japanese book sector. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 6(2), 99–114.
Wood, S. L. (2001). Remote purchase environments: The influence of return policy leniency on two-stage 
decision processes. Journal of Marketing Research, 38(2), 157–169.
XiaoYan, Q., Yong, H., Qinli, D., & Stokes, P. (2012). Reverse logistics network design model based on 
e-commerce. International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 20(2), 251–261.
Xiao, Y., & Zhou, B. (2020). Does the development of delivery industry increase the production of municipal 
solid waste?—an empirical study of China. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 155, 104577.
Xie, C., Gong, Y., Xu, X., Chiang, C. Y., & Chen, Q. (2023). The influence of return channel type on the 
relationship between return service quality and customer loyalty in omnichannel retailing. Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, 36(4), 1105–1134.
Xie, G., Huang, L., Apostolidis, C., Huang, Z., Cai, W., & Li, G. (2021). Assessing consumer preference for 
overpackaging solutions in e-commerce. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 18(15), 7951.
Xie, Q. H., Zhang, X. W., Lv, W. G., Cheng, S. Y., Huang, H. X., & Cai, S. D. (2013). Research on re
use reverse logistics network of disused electric appliances based on election campaign algorithm. In 
Applied Mechanics and Materials (Vol. 397, pp. 1121–1128). Trans Tech Publications Ltd.
Xu, J., & Jiang, Y. (2009). Study of reverse logistics in the E-commerce environment. International Business 
Research, 2(1), 128–130.
Xu, Y., Li, H., Song, W., & Dang, X. (2023). Welfare promoter or profit obstructor? The role of return-freight 
insurance in online retailing.
Yadegari, E., Najmi, H., Ghomi-Avili, M., & Zandieh, M. (2015). A flexible integrated forward/reverse logis
tics model with random path-based memetic algorithm. Iranian Journal of Management Studies, 8(2), 
287–313.
Yang, F., Hu, P., Zhao, F., & Hu, C. (2015). Customer returns model in a dual-channel supply chain. Journal 
of Modelling in Management.
Yang, G., & Ji, G. (2022). The impact of cross-selling on managing consumer returns in omnichannel opera
tions. Omega, 111, 102665.
Yang, G., Ji, G., & Tan, K. H. (2020). Impact of artificial intelligence adoption on online returns policies. 
Annals of Operations Research, 1–24.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Yang, G., & Mu, C. M. (2019). A machine learning approach to shipping box design. In Proceedings of SAI 
Intelligent Systems Conference (pp. 402–407). Springer, Cham.
Yang, H. (2014, May). Returns reverse logistics management strategy in e-commerce B2C Market. In Inter
national Conference on Logistics Engineering, Management and Computer Science (LEMCS 2014). 
Atlantis Press.
Yang, L., Li, X., Xia, Y., & Aneja, Y. P. (2023a). Returns operations in omnichannel retailing with buy-online
and-return-to-store. Omega, 119, Article 102874.
Yang, Y., Habib, K., & Wood, M. O. (2023b). Establishing best practices for E-commerce transport packag
ing waste management in Canada: A systematic review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 429, Article 
139377.
Yan, R., & Pei, Z. (2019). Return policies and O2O coordination in the e-tailing age. Journal of Retailing and 
Consumer Services, 50, 314–321.
Yan, X. I. O. N. G. (2005). Reverse logistics profit-maximization model and its application strategy based on 
E-business. Journal of Shanghai Institute of Technology.
Yanyan, W. (2010). Research on the reverse logistics model based on e-commerce. In 2010 International 
Conference on Logistics Systems and Intelligent Management (ICLSIM) (Vol. 2, pp. 687–691). IEEE.
Yao, H., & Ran, X. (2019). Reverse Logistics in e-commerce Development Based on Trilateral Game. In Pro
ceedings of the 2019 3rd International Conference on Management Engineering, Software Engineering 
and Service Sciences (pp. 123–127). ACM.
Yasin, M. M., Alavi, J., Czuchry, A., & Shafieyoun, R. (2014). An exploratory investigation of factors shap
ing electronic commerce practices in Iran: Benchmarking the role of technology and culture. Bench
marking: An International Journal.
Yu, J., & Ni, J. (2013). Development strategies for SME E-commerce based on cloud computing. In 2013 
Seventh International Conference on Internet Computing for Engineering and Science (pp. 1–8). IEEE.
Yu, Y., & Kim, H. S. (2019). Online retailers’ return policy and prefactual thinking: An exploratory study 
of USA and China e-commerce markets. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An Interna
tional Journal.
Zaarour, N., Melachrinoudis, E., Solomon, M., & Mine, H. (2014). A reverse logistics network model for 
handling returned products. International Journal of Engineering Business Management, 6, 6–13.
Zennaro, I., Finco, S., Calzavara, M., & Persona, A. (2022). Implementing E-commerce from logistic per
spective: Literature review and methodological framework. Sustainability, 14(2), 911.
Zhang, F., & Song, G. (2016). Can delivery speed affect sale in ecommerce: Evidence from household appli
ance. In: 2016 International Conference on Logistics, Informatics and Service Sciences (LISS) (pp. 
1–5). IEEE.
Zhang, J., Li, H., Yan, R., & Johnston, C. (2017). Examining the signaling effect of e-tailers’ return policies. 
Journal of Computer Information Systems, 57(3), 191–200.
Zhang, J., Xu, Q., & He, Y. (2018). Omnichannel retail operations with consumer returns and order cancella
tion. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 118, 308–324.
Zhang, M., Huang, G. Q., Xu, S. X., & Zhao, Z. (2019). Optimization based transportation service trading in 
B2B e-commercelogistics. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 30(7), 2603–2619.
Zhang, M., Pratap, S., Zhao, Z., Prajapati, D., & Huang, G. Q. (2020). Forward and reverse logistics vehicle 
routing problems with time horizons in B2C e-commerce logistics. International Journal of Production 
Research, 1–20.
Zhang, S., Hou, H., Wang, G., Yao, Y., Zhang, Y., & Xu, H. (2024). Exploring the metabolic characteristic 
of express packaging waste to promote the synergy of pollution and carbon reduction. Environmental 
Impact Assessment Review, 106, 107523.
Zhang, T., & Choi, T. M. (2020). Optimal consumer sales tax policies for online‐offline retail operations with 
consumer returns. Naval Research Logistics (NRL).
Zhang, T., Guo, X., & Wu, T. (2022). An analysis of cross-channel return processing with return-freight insur
ance for live streaming platforms. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 174, 108805.
Zhao, S., Wu, F., Jia, T., & Shu, L. (2018). The impact of product returns on price and delivery time competi
tion in online retailing. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 125, 658–667.
Zhao, X., Hu, S., & Meng, X. (2020). Who should pay for return freight in the online retailing? Retailers or 
consumers. Electronic Commerce Research, 20(2), 427–452.
Zhao, Y., Guan, Z. M., & Zhang, J. (2023). Return freight strategies and selling formats in e-commerce 
supply chain: The perspective of consumer fairness concerns and online shopping returns. Journal of 
Retailing and Consumer Services, 75, 103493.
Zhilong, Y., & Guisheng, H. (2023). Research on the evolution of express packaging recycling strategy con
sidering virtual incentives and heterogeneous subsidies. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 8478.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research
Zhuang, Y., Zhao, H., & Zhang, C. (2016). Multiobjective Optimization for forward and Reverse Logistics 
Network Design in Rural Areas. In 2016 IEEE 13th International Conference on e-Business Engineer
ing (ICEBE) (pp. 316–321). IEEE.
Zhu, X., & Xiuquan, X. U. (2013). An integrated optimization model of a closed-loop supply chain under 
uncertainty. In LISS 2012 (pp. 1389–1395). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Zikopoulos, C., & Tagaras, G. (2007). Impact of uncertainty in the quality of returns on the profitability of 
a single-period refurbishing operation. European Journal of Operational Research, 182(1), 205–225.
Zimmermann, T., & Bliklen, R. (2020). Single-use vs. reusable packaging in e-commerce: Comparing carbon 
footprints and identifying break-even points. Gaia, 29(3), 176–183.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a 
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manu
script version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
1 3