Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11457-026-09495-5
RESEARCH
Lost in Transit: Reconstructing Transhipment Costs 
from the Roman Era
James Page1 
Received: 10 September 2025 / Accepted: 6 January 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Transhipment was an activity that all cargo had to undergo during its journey, but is often 
absent from discussions and mobility models of Roman transport. The surviving evidence 
for the cost and time of transferring cargo from the Roman period is often fragmentary 
and difficult to interpret, but is clear that transhipment was a complex, multistage process. 
Periods spent in transhipment hubs could cost significant time and money, making tran
shipment’s inclusion in mobility analyses a necessity. This paper uses a combination of 
ancient literary and archaeological evidence to explore the cost and time of transhipment in 
the Roman era. The key stages of the transhipment process are outlined, highlighting that 
transhipment activities went beyond just the physical handling of cargo. Comparative evi
dence, in the form of architectural energetics, is also applied to Roman contexts to further 
explore the duration of transhipment activities. Finally, the importance of considering the 
volume of cargo undergoing transfer, and the subsequent impact this had on transport flows 
through transhipment hubs, is highlighted. The paper’s analysis of Roman transhipment 
activities is used to propose two new methods for incorporating transhipment costs (in both 
time and money) into future models and discussions of mobility.
Keywords Transhipment · Roman transport · Roman ports · Cargo transfer · Modelling
Introduction
During the Roman era, significant quantities of goods and materials were moved over long 
distances. Foodstuffs, raw materials, and luxuries, to name but a few, crossed from one 
side of the empire to the other. Ports, both maritime and fluvial, were hubs of activity, 
processing vast quantities of arriving and departing cargo. Throughout its journey from 
point of production to point of consumption, a critical stage in a cargo’s journey was tran
shipment, where goods were transferred from one mode of transport to another. Tranship
ment took a variety of forms. Cargo might be transferred between different transport types: 
maritime-terrestrial, terrestrial-fluvial, or fluvial-maritime. Alternatively, cargoes could be 
split up into smaller consignments or united into bigger shipments, all while utilising the 
* James Page 
james.page@bsc.es
1
Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
Vol.:(0123456789)
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 2 of 23
same form of transport. Not every settlement had access to a navigable river or seaport, and 
most journeys necessarily utilised a combination of transportation (Adams 2012; Campbell 
2012; Laurence 1998). This meant most cargo would be transhipped multiple times before 
it reached its destination.
Over the past decade, theoretical models have significantly advanced understanding on 
the Roman economy (Brughmans 2020, 2022; Rubio-Campillo and Coto-Sarmiento 2022; 
Wilson 2022). Using increasingly sophisticated computational and statistical techniques, 
models have been used to test theories surrounding transport and trade at scales ranging 
from a single city to the entirety of the Roman Empire (Brughmans and Poblome 2016; 
De Soto 2019; Livarda and Orengo 2015; Mclean and Rubio-Campillo 2022; Orengo and 
Livarda 2016; Scheidel 2014). Transhipment represents a key stage of any cargo’s jour
ney, but it has often been overlooked in prior discussions and models of ancient mobility. 
This is, in part, due to the disparate state of evidence for the cost and time of transhipment 
during the Roman period. Diocletian’s Edict of Maximum Prices, the principal source of 
transport costs in the Roman world, does not include transhipment fees (Erim and Reyn
olds 1970). Other evidence for transhipment costs, notably from papyri, is often vague and 
fragmentary, with concrete figures being hard to come by. Although transhipment is pri
marily envisaged as the physical transfer of cargo, this often formed only part of the pro
cess. Other stages of transhipment, such as the payment of customs dues, docking tariffs, 
and warehouse fees also added to costs but are difficult to quantify. Estimating the time it 
took for goods to be transhipped suffers from similar limitations, although transhipment 
activities from later periods offer a point of comparison. The limited data and difficulty in 
reconstructing transhipment processes have led to them being generally absent from many 
models of Roman transport.1 However, transhipment could be an expensive and time-con
suming process. Indeed, comparative evidence from thirteenth and sixteenth-century con
struction accounts suggest transhipment could make up between 20 and 30% of the total 
cost of transport, making its inclusion in mobility analyses essential (Russell 2013).
Over the past thirty years, a significant quantity of data has been gathered on the pro
cessing of cargo in the Roman era. Iconographic representations of docking operations, 
legal agreements concerning cargo, and physical port infrastructure all provide a rich back
ground for transhipment processes. New research in adjacent fields, such as the use of ener
getics to explore ancient construction, also provides new points of comparison and data for 
labour costs (Barker and Russell 2012, 2023; DeLaine 1997; 2015, 2017). Building on the 
foundations of earlier work, this article does not seek to provide exact figures for the cost 
and time of transhipment during the Roman period. Such figures, if they ever existed, likely 
varied considerably from cargo to cargo, between ports, and over time. Rather, it aims to 
provide a body of contextualised evidence to help future discussions and models of mobil
ity better incorporate transhipment into their analyses. Discussing figures for transhipment 
in context will help reveal the full complexity of the process beyond the physical act of 
transferring cargo. It will also serve to highlight important aspects of transhipment often 
not factored into discussions and models of mobility, such as storage time before or after 
loading and the volume of cargo being transferred.
1 For example, the original ORBIS model did not include transfer costs, although an update allowed 
users to manually add a time cost in the form of days (http:// orbis. stanf ord. edu/# seaex pense Last accessed 
05/09/25).
Page 3 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
The Transhipment Process
Transhipment, at its simplest, consisted of unloading cargo from one mode of transport and 
loading it onto another for its onward journey. However, the reality was frequently more 
complex, and transhipment was often a multi-stage process. Cargo might be moved mul
tiple times at transhipment hubs between stages in its journey, involving significant labour 
and bureaucracy. Although the exact process would vary from cargo to cargo and from 
port to port, many aspects of transhipment can be reconstructed from the surviving ancient 
evidence.
Large quantities of cargo were transported along maritime routes during the Roman 
period. Great emporia such as Alexandria, Ephesus, Massalia, and Portus were equipped 
with extensive harbour facilities and handled hundreds of shipments each year (Brandon 
et al. 2014; Keay 2018). The presence of a deepwater harbour equipped with wharfing 
allowed a maritime vessel to set up alongside the dock and unload directly onto the land. 
However, in the absence of such facilities, maritime vessels were forced to moor offshore, 
unloading their cargo onto waiting lighters which would then transfer it to land. A similar 
situation might arise if a vessel with a deep draught approached a river harbour. The ship 
would need to stay in the deeper part of the channel while smaller vessels transferred goods 
to the riverbank. These smaller vessels or lighters, often identified as scaphae or lenun
cularii, were important parts of the harbour ecosystem (Casson 1965; Campbell 2012). 
Alternatively, cargo could be transferred from a maritime ship directly to a river vessel, as 
depicted by a late second-century AD mosaic at Statio 25 in the Piazzale delle Corporazi
oni, Ostia (see Fig. 1). These river vessels, termed naves codicariae, are well known from 
Fig. 1  Drawing of cargo being transferred from a maritime vessel to a navis codicaria depicted on a mosaic 
in Statio 25 in the Piazzale delle Corporazioni, Ostia (circa [c.] late second century AD)
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 4 of 23
Ostia and Portus, where they carried cargo upstream to Rome (Boetto 2011; Casson 1965; 
Keay 2018). The diverse range of harbour craft operating during the Roman period formed 
important intermediaries between maritime transport and terrestrial and fluvial networks. 
Their operation was well-organised, with associations of lenuncularii, scapharii, and codi
carii attested at ports such as Arles, Ostia, and Serville (Rougier 2020; Tran 2020). How
ever, their use added an additional step in the transhipment process, ultimately increasing 
the transfer time between stages in the cargo’s journey.
On inland waterways, barges, designed with the shallow water fluvial environments in 
mind, were constructed with flat bottoms rather than keeled hulls. This allowed barges to 
beach themselves on the riverbanks for loading and unloading in the absence of built har
bour facilities. While this provided rivercraft with a high degree of flexibility, evidence 
for fluvial ports with extensive harbourside infrastructure survives from across the Roman 
world (Campbell 2012). Indeed, facilities such as wharfing and warehouses, alongside 
more specialist equipment such as cranes and winches, would be essential for handling 
large cargoes and high quantities of material.
On the shore, porters were responsible for the transfer of cargo from the warehouse or 
dockside onto a waiting vessel or vice versa.2 Most of the loading and unloading was done 
by hand, either carrying or rolling the cargo (Martelli 2013).3 In some circumstances, the 
crew or agents related to the owners of the cargo might try to unload the vessel themselves 
rather than employ porters at the harbour, depriving them of work (Freu 2009, 304–06). 
A fourth-century constitution issued by Valentinian I and Valens, granting the corpus of 
the saccarii at Portus a monopoly over the loading and unloading of cargo at the harbour, 
may represent an effort to guarantee employment to porters during this later period (Codex 
Theodosianus 14.22.1; Tran 2020). Although there was likely sufficient demand at major 
emporia to sustain a resident population of porters, in minor ports or rural areas along 
the waterways the situation was different. In these cases, the boatmen or the traders them
selves may have been responsible for the loading of the cargo, alongside seasonal labour.4 
Of course, large, heavy, and unwieldy cargoes, such as stone sarcophagi or architectural 
elements, could not have been moved by hand. Specialist equipment such as cranes and 
winches, alongside their operators, were a necessity and would have limited the ports 
where such cargo could be processed (Russell 2013, 2018). The high value and high risk of 
breakage for items like stone would have resulted in extra care being taken to ensure their 
safe loading and unloading, resulting in a lengthy transhipment time.
Loading cargo onto a ship was no simple matter. Goods needed careful placement in 
and removal from the hold, both to ensure the stability of the vessel and to reduce the like
lihood of damage to the cargo. Loose cargo could prove deadly, and sufficient movement 
could be enough to destabilise and capsize a vessel (Hein and Kilikoglou 2020; McGrail 
1989). As a result, cargo was packed tightly. Amphorae were interlocked with each other 
and might be stacked five containers high (Hein and Kilikoglou 2020). Where possible, 
spare space in the hold was filled with extra goods, not just to maximise the voyage’s profit 
2 Terms broadly covering porters include baiuli, geruli, or saccarii in Latin, and sakkophoroi, phortègoi, 
nautophoroi, ômophoroi or achthophoroi in Greek (Freu 2009: 306).
3 The majority of cargo at ports was loaded and unloaded by hand before the advent of the shipping con
tainer in the mid-twentieth century (Levinson 2006: Chap. 2).
4 For example, P.Mich. 20.801-820 record numerous undertakings of boatmen to transport wheat and bar
ley from the nome of Oxyrhynchus to Alexandria and Pelusium in the fourth century AD (Sijpesteijn et al. 
2011). In most cases, it is either the boatmen or the landowners who undertake the loading of the cereals 
onto the waiting craft.
Page 5 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
but also to help reduce cargo movement. Finewares, such as Italian Terra Sigillata (ITS) 
and Aftrican red slip (ARS), often filled this role (Fentress and Perkins 1988; McGrail 
1989). Further precautions taken during loading to protect cargoes are evident from the 
remains of several shipwrecks. On the Late Roman Ses Fontanelles Wreck, the cargo of 
amphorae was padded with dunnage of vine shoots and reeds to prevent the vessels from 
knocking and abrading each other (and the hull) during the voyage, reducing the risk of 
breakages and damage (Munar Llabrés et al. 2022, 491). Similar precautions are also seen 
on the Madrague de Giens, Ilovik-Paržine 1, and Bou Ferrer wrecks, amongst others (De 
Juan and Cibecchini 2021; Fournier et al. 2024; Tchernia et al. 1978). Although its primary 
purpose was to protect the cargo and the vessel, dunnage might also be sold at the ship’s 
destination as a source of extra profit. For example, the small branches used as dunnage 
for a cargo of roof tiles in the wreck of the Kamensko river barge may have been sold 
as firewood after the unloading of the vessel (Boetto et al. 2021). Although a significant 
amount of trade in the Roman period was direct, with the entire cargo unloaded at a singu
lar destination port, some ships engaged in itinerant trade or cabotage. If a ship was stop
ping at multiple destinations, care would be taken to load the cargo so that it could easily 
be removed in sequence. Goods being unloaded at the first port of call would need to be 
the most accessible, while those destined for the final stop of the voyage would have been 
lower down.
Upon arrival at its destination port, cargo was unlikely to have been immediately 
transferred to onward transport for the next leg of its journey. It would have needed to 
be received and accounted for by a handler, cleared by the port authorities, and (if it had 
arrived from outside the province) have customs dues paid (Keay 2018; Purpura 2022). 
Several surviving documents attest to the extensive written bureaucracy involved in the 
unloading and receiving of cargo at destination ports. Papyrus P. Bingen 77 forms a promi
nent example, recording in-depth the docking operations of eleven ships over two days at 
Alexandria. Details included the names of each vessel, their ports of origin, their cargo, 
their capacity, length of voyage, vessel owner, captain, and crew. Other documents, such 
as the Tabulae Pompeianae Sulpiciorum, point to the intricate connections and agreements 
between traders and transporters (Jakab 2022; Marzano 2022). Cargoes embarked on a 
maritime vessel were often mixed, with multiple merchants contributing goods. This cre
ated a need to differentiate the merchandise of individual traders, especially if products of 
the same type were being transported onboard. Tituli picti served to add the owner’s name 
(amongst other data) to amphorae. Inscribed stoppers, seals, or labels made out of wood, 
lead, or clay might also be used to record ownership of cargo (Purpura 2022). A relief from 
Portus depicts porters unloading amphorae from a ship passing a token to waiting harbour 
officials (see Fig. 2). These tokens, the transfer of which is being recorded in a ledger by 
one of the officials, may have acted as both a way to identify ownership and to ensure 
the quantity of cargo matched the ship’s manifest (Rickman 1998). Perishable cargo would 
also need to be tested to ensure its quality matched the provided sample for the shipment 
(Keay 2018; Purpura 2022).
Once they had cleared the dockside, goods would likely have spent a period of time 
stored in a warehouse until onward transport could be arranged. Journeys were subject 
to the wind and the weather, alongside a host of other variables (Arnaud 2007; Camp
bell 2022). Outside of some contexts such as the annona, where state apparatus ensured a 
degree of contingency, the likelihood of transport aligning at both ends of a journey was 
probably slim, necessitating a period of storage. If a warehouse was close to the dock, por
ters may have carried goods directly to their place of storage (Martelli 2013; Virlouvet 
2020). However, if there was some distance between the wharf and the warehouse, goods 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 6 of 23
Fig. 2  Drawing of a relief from Portus showing amphorae being unloaded from a ship. A porter hands a 
token to one of three waiting officials (Credit: Zofia Guertin)
may have been placed on a wagon, cart, or pack animal for transport to the horreum, where 
they would have been received by workers in the warehouse. In addition to adding time to 
the transhipment process, a period spent in a horreum would have also added to expenses, 
covering the cost of the storage and guarding of the goods. Once safely placed in a ware
house, cargo could then wait for onward transport to be arranged, at which point the pro
cess outlined above would be carried out in the reverse.
The brief overview of cargo transhipment outlined above demonstrates that the physical 
transfer of cargo between transport modes formed only part of the overall process. Cargo 
might need to be moved multiple times within the port environment before transferring 
onto the next leg of its journey. Administrative procedures and bureaucracy within the port 
would have added considerable time and expense to the process as tariffs were paid and 
cargo accounted for. In many cases, a period spent stored in a warehouse would have been 
necessary while onward transport was organised. This complex, multi-stage process, could 
take significant time and expense to complete, something that is reflected in the surviving 
evidence for transhipment figures.
Transhipment Figures
In the following sections, the available evidence from the Roman period regarding the 
monetary cost and duration of transhipment is explored. These variables were chosen as 
they represent the most frequent measures of ‘cost’ used in models of Roman transport. 
Page 7 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
Transhipment figures are likely to have varied extensively across the Roman world in both 
time and expense. They would have been highly dependent on factors such as the cargo 
type, the time of year, and the facilities of the port where transhipment occurred. As dis
cussed above, while cargoes of smaller goods, such as amphorae and finewares, could have 
been loaded by hand, cranes and winches would have been essential for heavy cargoes such 
as stone. Meanwhile, the constitution issued by Valentinian I and Valens in AD 364 records 
that the remuneration for the loading and unloading of goods at Portus varied according to 
the seasons (Codex Theodosianus 14.22.1). Porters may have charged more to handle cargo 
during the peak summer months when they were most in demand. Quieter periods may 
have incurred a lower fee, especially if there was competition for work between different 
labour gangs (Hawkins 2013, 340).
Surviving transhipment figures from the Roman world are often difficult to interpret. 
The data for them are extremely limited and comes from a wide variety of locations and 
time periods. These range from Italy to Egypt and from the first century AD to the fourth 
century AD. The limited quantity and eclectic nature of the evidence means that it must 
be treated with extreme caution. The Roman Empire encompassed a vast geographic area 
and was home to diverse communities. The transhipment process for cargo at a Romano
British port may well have been very different to one in Asia Minor. In the same vein, 
the Roman period encompassed centuries and oversaw changes in technology and contain
erisation, both of which may have affected the cost and duration of transhipment (Bevan 
2014; Wilson 2011a, b). However, the limited and disparate state of the evidence makes it 
difficult to effectively incorporate these spatial and temporal variations into reconstructions 
of transhipment cost.
The context of surviving data is also problematic. Surviving evidence for transhipment 
cost is not distributed evenly, being primarily concentrated in the Mediterranean area. 
Egypt has also produced a high quantity of evidence due to the ideal preservation condi
tions for papyri, allowing the recovery of administrative documents such as freight con
tracts that do not survive from other areas. Furthermore, the majority of evidence concerns 
major ports and transhipment hubs, resulting in a focus on large emporia within the discus
sion. However, it should be cautioned that reconstructing transhipment figures based on 
estimates from a top-down approach may result in an overestimation or underestimation of 
costs when applied to smaller ports. For example, the demands placed on small ports may 
have been lower than major emporia, leading to reduced costs. Equally, the limited facili
ties at these ports may have made transhipment activities more difficult, serving to increase 
costs.
Finally, the type of cargo being transhipped will have had an impact on the cost and 
duration of transfer. The time taken to tranship a tonne of grain would not be the same as 
the time taken to move a tonne of stone, and different methods would have been employed 
in each transfer. A sack of grain could be moved by hand, while a large block of stone 
would have needed extra equipment such as cranes. Types of containers will also have 
made a difference to transhipment. While amphorae could be carried by hand, either indi
vidually or between two porters, a barrel could have been rolled, allowing heavy loads to 
be moved with greater ease (Marlière 2001, 2014). In dolia ships (sometimes described as 
proto-tankers), wine carried inside the large ceramic vessels built into the ship’s structure 
would have needed to be siphoned out into containers on the shore, adding a layer of dif
f
iculty and expense to its transhipment (Rice 2016). Frustratingly, the limited scope of the 
surviving evidence makes reconstructing this level of variation difficult. As a result, there 
remains a risk in over or under-estimating the time and cost of transhipment when extrapo
lating figures from one type of cargo to another.
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 8 of 23
The surviving body of evidence for Roman transhipment figures forms a complex data
set. However, even with the limited quantity of evidence available, interesting patterns and 
trends are visible, providing a tentative indication of the possible cost and duration of tran
shipment during the Roman period. As long as they are treated with due caution, the fig
ures explored here will be able to serve as a starting point for researchers when considering 
how to incorporate transhipment costs into their models.
Transhipment Costs
The monetary costs of transhipment from the Roman world are difficult to reconstruct. 
Most surviving evidence consists of fragmentary papyri, alongside some incomplete epig
raphy. Coming from a wide chronological spectrum, figures for costs associated with tran
shipment are given in a range of denominations, which include the drachma, obol, and 
nummus.5 The value of these coins was not static across the Roman period, making direct 
comparisons difficult. In many cases, figures for the cost of transhipment come from state
related activities, mostly the shipping of grain and wine for the annona. Given the state’s 
involvement in the organisation and shipping of these cargoes, it is hard to know how repre
sentative these figures are for wider commercial transactions (Adams 2018). Furthermore, 
many of the documents recording transhipment costs are missing important contextual 
information. In a typical example (Freu 2009, 318), a papyrus from Oxyrhynchus dated to 
c. AD 90 (P.Oxy. 6.985) records that a group of porters were paid 8 drachmas and 4 obols 
to move 228 tetrachoes of wine (approximately 4300 L). Although the figures on the papy
rus include the quantity of the cargo and the cost of its movement, they do not indicate how 
many porters were involved, the distance the wine travelled, or how long it took to move. 
Without this context, it is difficult to ascertain exactly what governed the porter’s fee. For 
example, was it the quantity of the wine being moved or the time spent moving it?
One of the most extensive pieces of surviving evidence for transhipment costs comes 
from a second-century AD freight contract from Oxyrhynchus (P.Oxy. 3.522). The papyrus 
records the expenses associated with three rivercraft transporting cereals in Egypt, along
side important contextual detail (see Table 1). Amongst the payments (which included 
the cost of carriage, food for the sailors, and pay for guards), are the wages for the men 
involved in loading the vessels. The load of the first vessel (that of Triadelphus) was 3400 
artabae, for which eleven men were paid 6 drachmae and 2 obols.6 The load of the second 
and third vessels (those of Horion and Pausiris) is recorded jointly, as are their loading 
costs. The cargo of the two vessels consisted of 2000 artabae of wheat, for which seven 
men were paid 4 drachmae to load. In both cases, the wages for each man were approxi
mately 3.5 obols (assuming they were evenly distributed), perhaps suggesting a flat rate 
paid for each job regardless of the cargo’s size and the time taken to load it. The wages 
paid to the porters in P.Oxy. 3.522 are not dissimilar to the wages preserved in other papyri 
from the late first and early second century AD. P.Leiden Inv.111 (c. 111 AD) records that 
a group of porters were paid 8 drachmae to load a cargo of pulses, while the porters in the 
aforementioned P.Oxy. 6.985 were paid 8 drachmae and 4 obols to move a shipment of 
wine (Chepel 2023, 158).
5 The nummus is a denomination of bronze coinage introduced by Diocletian c. AD 294. It has also been 
referred to as the follis in past literature.
6 The artaba is an ancient unit of dry volume equal to approximately 36.18 L.
Table 1  Breakdown of costs and expenses contained within P.Oxy 3.522 (second century AD)
Vessel: Triadelphus
Transportation of 3400 artabae of wheat
Tax per 1000 artabae
Carriage of 171 artabae of wheat from drying place
Jar of wine to assistants and soldiers
Wages of 11 workmen employed in lading
Granary guard wages
Total:
Costs:
712 drachmae
12 drachmae
6 drachmae
8 drachmae, 1 obol
6 drachmae, 2 obols
18 drachmae
Vessels: Horion and Pausiris
Transportation of 2000 artabae of wheat
Payment of pilot
Jar of wine to assistants and soldiers
2 jars of wine to the sailors
Provisions for sailors (excluding bread)
Wages of 7 workmen employed in lading
Wages for porter working beyond normal lading 
activities
Costs:
420 drachmae
8 drachmae
8 drachmae, 1 obol
16 drachmae, 2 obols
4 obols
4 drachmae
5 drachmae
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
Page 9 of 23 
    3 
762 drachmae, 3 obols
Total:
466 drachmae
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 10 of 23
Table 2  Breakdown of costs 
and expenses contained within 
P.Oxy. 14.1650 (c. AD 75–125). 
Although some costs do not 
survive, the total expenditure 
is provided at the end of the 
document
Expenses
Expenditure
Transport of 550 artabae of wheat
Repairs to the boat
Taxes
Examination dues
Banker’s fee
Commission
Exchange (?)
Interpreter’s fee
Replacement rudder
Payment for guard on land
Payment for guard on boat
Clerks fee
To Artemis
Affidavit
Receipt
Examination dues for a libation
Total
44 drachmae
6 drachmae
4 drachmae
4 drachmae
1 drachma
5 drachmae
1 drachma
2 drachmae
14 drachmae, 4 obols
(…)
(…), 2 obols
4 drachmae
1 drachma
1 drachma
4 obols
2 drachmae
91 drachmae
In addition to individual expenses, P.Oxy. 3.522 also records the total expenditure for 
each vessel’s voyage, allowing loading costs to be viewed in their wider context. The total 
expenditure for the voyage of Triadelphus’ vessel was 762 drachmae, 3 obols, while the 
total expenditure for Horion and Pausisris’ vessels was 466 drachmae. In both cases, the 
porters’ wages were less than 1% of the overall outlay. In a world where labour was cheap 
and abundant, it is perhaps not surprising that renumeration for physical work such as 
loading and unloading was low (Hawkins 2013; Scheidel 2010). Although lading a ves
sel involved a degree of expertise, the presence of a gangmaster would have provided the 
majority of coordination, allowing unskilled or partially skilled labourers to be hired (Tran 
2020, 95). The cost of loading was also low in comparison to other expenses incurred dur
ing the vessels’ time in port, such as paying guards for the cargo, hiring a pilot, and buying 
food for the sailors. Indeed, the cost of a jar of wine for the loading assistants and guard 
(8 drachmae and 1 obol) was more than the wages for the eleven porters loading the 3400 
artabae cargo of Triadelphus’ vessel.
When all harbour operations and expenses are factored in, transhipment costs made up 
6.57% of Triadelphus’ and 9.88% of Horion and Pausiris’ total expenditure, reinforcing the 
importance of including costs beyond loading and unloading when considering tranship
ment. The situation is echoed by other surviving freight contracts from Oxyrhynchus. In 
papyri P.Oxy. 14.1650 + P.Oxy. 14.1650 (a) (c. AD 75–AD 125) and P.Oxy. 14.1651 (third 
century AD), a host of other expenses besides loading are detailed in the contracts. Other 
incidental costs, such as payment for guards, clerks, storage, and inspections, all feature 
prominently and represented a significant outlay.7 Indeed, for one of the vessels contracted 
in P.Oxy. 14.1650, harbour operations accounted for 51.5% of the total expenses, more 
7 See comparisons in labour expenses for ancient stone working in Barker and Russell (2023), where inci
dental costs aside from the physical labour are shown to have formed a significant outlay.
Page 11 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
than the actual cost of transporting the cargo (see Table 2). It is also worth remembering 
that the expenses outlined in the freight contacts discussed above cover only the loading of 
the cargo at its port of origin. At the vessels’ destination, port fees would be incurred for 
unloading and other expenses in the harbour, further increasing costs.
The range of fees and tariffs beyond the physical loading and unloading of cargo are 
further demonstrated by a late third or early fourth-century AD inscription discovered in 
Rome near Piazza San Silvestro. The translation of the inscription has proved difficult 
due to its fragmentary nature, disagreement over whether it should be read top to bottom 
or bottom to top, and the presence of several hapax legomena (terms for which only one 
instance of use survives) within the language (Malmberg 2015; Rougé 1957; Vera 2006). 
However, it has been interpreted as a list of tariffs for the unloading and storage of wine 
barrels from Ciconias. Ciconias (literally Storks) is assumed to refer to a place, probably 
a port near Posterula della Pila on the lefthand bank of the Tiber (Malmberg 2015). The 
area’s name ‘Storks’ may also be in reference to the cargo cranes at the port (McCormick 
2012, 75; Rougé 1957). The inscription is outlined below:
(h)austoribus in cupa una numm(is) XXX / tabu
lariis in singulis apocis numm(is) XX / exasciatori 
in cupa una numm(is) X /
falancariis qui de Ciconiis ad templum cupas / 
referre consuerunt numm(is) … /
custodibus cuparum [numm(is)…] /
de ampullis placuit ut post degustation[em] posses
sori reddantur /
professionariis de Ciconiis statim ut advenerent / 
vinum in una cupa numm(is) CXX
To the drainers, 30 nummi per barrel;
To the bookkeepers, 20 nummi per receipt;
To the barrel-openers, 10 nummi per barrel;
To the porters who usually carry the barrels from 
Ciconias to the temple, [?] nummi;
To the guardians of the barrels, [? nummi];
Regarding the sample bottles, it was decided to return 
them to their owners after the tasting;
To the tax account examiners at Ciconias, upon 
arrival of the wine, 120 nummi per barrel
CIL VI. 1785 = 31931 [Translation from Malmberg 2015, 199.]
The surviving tariffs from the inscription reflect the multiple stages of transhipment and 
fees that needed to be paid at each stage. These included tariffs that had to be paid per bar
rel (for example to the barrel drainers, openers, and the tax officials), and tariffs that were 
paid per load (for example to the porters moving the barrels and those guarding them). The 
wine in the barrels was likely destined for a cella vinaria (wine cellar) at the Temple of the 
Sun before redistribution, imported to the capital as part of the vina fiscalia introduced by 
Aurelian (SHA Aurel. 48.4; Pena 1999; Vera 2006). The tariffs in the inscription represent 
a significant outlay for each shipment during its transit from dockside to storage. The fee 
for the actual unloading of the barrels, either by hand or by crane, has not survived. How
ever, once the cargo had been unloaded and accounted for on the dockside, a tariff of 120 
nummi per barrel was payable to the tax authorities at the port. A fee then needed to be 
paid for the carriage of the barrels from the port to the temple, and another fee to those who 
guarded them (either at the temple or at the port). Upon arrival at the temple, the book
keepers were paid 20 nummi for receipt of the wine barrels. Once transferred inside, there 
was a fee to open each barrel. A subsequent fee was then paid to drain each barrel, presum
ably either into a larger storage vessel (for example a dolium) or a decanting into smaller 
vessels for distribution. As with the freight contracts discussed above, fees concerning the 
physical handling of cargo formed only a fraction of the overall expenses incurred during 
the transfer of the wine from barrels on a river barge to its point of distribution. The fees 
for each activity in the inscription are standardised, as might be expected for expenditure 
associated with state activity. There may have been more flexibility in the fees set for pri
vate commerce, although the presence of professional associations at transhipment hubs, 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 12 of 23
such as the corpus of the saccarii, may have served to limit competition within individual 
port environments (Rohde 2020; Tran 2020).
The surviving figures for transhipment cost from the Roman world suggest that the 
actual fees for the loading and unloading of the cargo represent a fraction of transhipment’s 
overall cost. With access to cheap labour, the physical transfer of cargo from ship to dock
side and vice versa may have accounted for less than 1% of total transport costs. However, 
when other harbour and transfer expenses are factored in, transhipment costs could quickly 
mount up, equating to between 5 and 10% of the value of a journey’s total expenditure in 
the case of P.Oxy. 3.522. In extreme cases, this portion might be even greater. The range of 
fees, tariffs, and expenditure incurred during transhipment varied from state taxes on goods 
to more mundane outlay covering things such as provisions for the crew or guards for the 
cargo. These served to make transit through transhipment hubs an expensive period for 
cargo, one that could often also prove time-consuming.
Transhipment Time
Surviving figures for the duration of transhipment from the Roman period are even rarer 
than those for cost. Some limited papyrological evidence has been recovered but, as with 
the figures for cost, it is often missing contextual information. For example, P.Oxy. 33.2670 
(AD 127), records the delivery and loading over nine days of 10,000 artabae onto a group 
of river barges. The total amount arriving at the port each day varied between 424 and 
1324 artabae. However, it is unknown how many workers were involved in the loading 
of the cargo, how the delivered grain was distributed, how many barges were present at 
the harbour, and how long it took to load them (Adams 2018, 187). Another papyrus from 
the Fayum (P.Lond. 3.948) dated to AD 236 preserves a shipping contract for the carriage 
of 250 artabae (approximately 9.5 tonnes) of the vegetable seed lachanospermon (Adams 
2018). The document records that it took two days to load the cargo but four days for its 
unloading. It is uncertain why it took double the amount of time to unload the cargo than 
it did to load it. Perhaps fewer porters were available at Oxyrhynchus to help with the 
unloading or equipment such as cranes were present at the vessel’s port of origin to speed 
up the loading process. Alternatively, extra time may have been factored into the unloading 
time at Oxyrhynchus to account for inspections of the cargo. To return to P.Oxy. 3.522, the 
contract for Horion and Pausiris’ vessels includes a special payment of 5 drachmae that 
was made to a porter who worked for three and a half days. However, this seems too short a 
period of time to load the 2000 artabae of wheat that formed the cargo (approximately 76 
tonnes) when compared to the time scales for cargo processing outlined for the 250 arta
bae cargo being transhipped in P.Lond. 3.948. The language of the papyrus is uncertain in 
this section, but the porter was likely engaged in a special task (hence the higher payment 
and short timescale) unrelated to the vessel’s lading (Chepel 2023).
The absence or fragmentary condition of figures outlining the time taken to transfer 
cargo in the ancient world makes them difficult to estimate. However, comparative evi
dence in the form of architectural energetics presents a way of estimating ancient figures. 
Architectural energetics is a type of reverse quantity surveying, where the goods and 
labour constants (measured in man-hours) needed to complete a task can be used to esti
mate the material needs and duration of a project. Nineteenth century building manuals, 
most notably Pegoretti’s 1869 Manuale pratico per l’estimazione dei lavori architettonici 
stradali, idraulici e di fortificazione per uso degli ingegneri ed architetti, have proved a 
useful source of data for labour constants (Pegoretti 1869). Given the similarities between 
Page 13 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
Table 3  The upper and lower time in minutes to transfer different types of stone from a boat or cart 
(Adapted from Pegoretti 1869, 281). The figures assume that a cartier or shipman is being assisted by a 
stonecutter and one or two handlers for each cubic metre of stone unloaded
Task
Lower time 
(minutes)
Upper 
time 
(minutes)
Unloading 1 cubic metre of porphyry, granite, serpentine, or other similar durable 
stone or marble
Unloading 1 cubic metre of limestone, travertine, sandstone, or puddingstone
Unloading 1 cubic metre of tufa, soft limestone, chalkstone, pumice, or volcanic 
slag
30
24
15
60
48
30
construction in the pre-industrial and ancient world (notably the use of manual labour 
rather than machinery to move items and perform tasks), they have been used as a source 
of comparison for labour figures in the Roman period.8 Architectural energetics have been 
successfully used in the study of ancient construction to estimate the labour costs associ
ated with projects, most famously those of the Baths of Caracalla (DeLaine 1997, 2015, 
2017). Although the veracity and applicability of the labour constants found in Pegore
tti have been questioned and there are inherent risks in applying evidence from one time 
period to another, comparisons to modern reconstruction, conservation, and restoration 
projects using traditional building techniques have shown a strong correlation between his 
f
igures and reality (Barker and Russell 2012; DeLaine 1997).
While building manuals are principally focused on activities related to construction, 
Pegoretti also includes labour constants for unloading materials. For loose cargo, an esti
mated time of between 24 and 48 min is given for the transfer of a cubic metre of loose 
material from a river vessel to the shore (Pegoretti 1869). Elsewhere in the manual (Pegore
tti 1869), more detailed estimates for the unloading of blocks of stone and marble from 
wagons and boats are provided (see Table 3). These figures provide a basis for estimating 
possible transhipment times. Using the labour constants, it is evident that a large cargo of 
heavy stone may have taken several days to safely unload and transfer. This is made appar
ent when the figures are applied to a case study using the early third-century AD Punta 
Scifo A wreck. The Punta Scifo A was carrying a c. 200-tonne cargo of approximately 
30 pieces of Pavonazzetto and Proconnesian marble when it sank (Parker 1992a). These 
included columns, basins, blocks, column capitals, column bases, tables and a statuary 
group in various stages of completion. A cubic metre of marble weighs approximately 2.71 
tonnes, resulting in the cargo having a hypothetical volume of around 74 cubic metres.9 
When applying Pegoretti’s figures, a duration of between 37 and 74 h is estimated for the 
unloading of the cargo. Assuming a ten-hour workday, the cargo might take between four 
and eight days to unload fully, a plausible length of time for such an activity.10 While this 
8 For example, Barresi (2003), Caré (2005), DeLaine (1997, 2015), Previato (2023), Russell (2013). The 
labour estimates given by the manuals have proved relatively accurate when compared to the labour exerted 
by modern stonemasons (Barker and Russell 2012).
9 Weight taken from Aqua-Calc.com. https:// www. aqua- calc. com/ calcu late/ volume- to- weight/ subst ance/ 
marble (Accessed 10/04/2025).
10 Most building manuals from the nineteenth century assume a ten-hour working day (Barker and Russell 
2012, 85).
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 14 of 23
example uses heavy marble, a similar-sized cargo of lighter stone, such as soft limestone or 
pumice, might have been unloaded in half the time. Equally, shorter or longer working days 
would impact the duration.
Of course, there are caveats to using labour constants to estimate transhipment time. 
Labour constants represent an idealised scenario, assuming that sufficient workmen are 
present and that the material to be moved is in a handleable state. The irregular shape of 
worked marble means that perfect cubic metres of stone will rarely be present, increas
ing either the ease or difficulty of movement. Although small stone blocks are moveable 
by hand over short distances, larger blocks of stone or architectural elements would have 
likely required additional hands to aid in their transfer (Russell 2013, 2018). The largest 
stone items, such as columns or hollowed-out sarcophagi, would have needed specialist 
equipment such as cranes and their operators to unload, something not factored into the 
labour costs outlined in the manual. Furthermore, Pegoretti’s figures are primarily con
cerned with the transhipment of stone, a heavy, bulky, and subsequently time-consuming 
item to load and unload. Cargoes of amphorae and finewares could be transferred with 
far less difficulty, resulting in a shorter transhipment time. The labour constants given for 
loose materials may serve as a better indication of the loading time for items such as sacks 
of grain. Finally, Pegoretti’s figures primarily refer to the unloading of cargo, rather than 
its loading. As highlighted earlier in the paper, loading could be a delicate process, requir
ing the careful placement and packing of goods to ensure the stability of the vessel and the 
safety of the cargo. As a result, it is possible that loading was a more time intensive transfer 
than the figures suggested for unloading.
The rarity of surviving figures recording the time of transhipment in the Roman world 
necessitates the use of comparative data from later periods in their reconstruction. Despite 
some drawbacks, labour constants present a valuable starting point for calculating the 
length of time it took to load and unload cargo. Using the high and low figures for the 
number of man-hours needed for the movement of a cubic metre of material, an informed 
estimate can be made on the time taken to transfer a cargo. Although a useful source of 
comparative data, energetics can only account for the physical transfer of cargo from one 
point to another (Barker and Russell 2023). The duration of other transhipment activities, 
such as cargo inspections and storage time, remains a source of speculation. These could 
be significant, especially when the high volumes of cargo being transiting through tran
shipment hubs are considered.
Cargo Volumes
In addition to cost and time, a final factor that is crucial to consider within the tranship
ment process is cargo volume (i.e. the amount of cargo being transferred). In discussions 
of mobility, cargo is often viewed in abstract terms as a value, rather than a real physical 
object. In a network model of Roman transport, a hypothetical ‘cargo’ might simply be 
described as a ‘tonne’ of some undefined item, travelling independently of any wider ship
ment.11 Although this simplification is useful for modelling, it does not reflect the reality 
of ancient transport and trade, resulting in idealised journeys free of delay and bureau
cratic constraints, and creating a perception of frictionless transport. For most of their 
11 For example, in Carreras and de Soto (2010; 2013), de Soto (2015, 2019), Orengo and Livarda (2016; 
Page 2024.).
Page 15 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
journey, goods travelled as part of a larger cargo, either of the same material or as a mixed 
consignment.
Although a tonne of cargo, depending on what it was, might fit onto a cart, a fluvial 
vessel could take on multiple carts’ worth of cargo, while a maritime vessel could hold 
multiple rivercrafts’ worth of cargo. This was also true in the reverse, with the cargo of a 
maritime vessel needing to be divided amongst multiple rivercraft, which in turn would 
need to be divided between multiple carts and so on. This is not to say that all the cargo 
had to be transferred at once or indeed transferred to the same mode of transport. Once at 
a transhipment hub, cargoes might be broken up, reunited, or mixed with others to form 
new shipments. Maritime ships had the greatest cargo capacities and can be separated into 
three categories based on their tonnage. The smallest (and most numerous) vessels could 
carry cargoes of up to 75 tonnes (Broekart and Zuiderhoek 2020, 111; Parker 1992b, 89). 
Examples of these include the Culip IV, the Diano Marina, and the Plemmirio B wrecks. 
Vessels belonging to the middle category, such as the Comacchio and San Pietro in Bev
agna wrecks, could carry between 75 and 200 tonnes. The biggest ships could hold cargoes 
upwards of 250 tonnes, with many of the largest, such as the Madrague de Giens and Albe
gna wrecks, dating to the Late Republic (Parker 1992b). Even larger vessels, such as the 
Obelisk ships, also existed, but these were designed with special purposes in mind rather 
than the routine transport of cargo (Broekart and Zuiderhoek 2020).
On the rivers, the largest fluvial vessels, such as the Zwammerdam 4, have been hypoth
esised as being capable of transporting cargoes of up to 30 tonnes (Bockius 2000; Broekart 
and Zuiderhoek 2020; de Weerd 1993). However, these were exceptional cases, their long 
lengths confining them to the greatest rivers where they had sufficient room to manoeuvre. 
Many rivercraft were considerably smaller, with most falling between 8 and 25 tonnes in 
terms of cargo capacity (Broekart and Zuiderhoek 2020; Campbell 2012). Notable exam
ples include the Arles-Rhône 3, which had a cargo capacity of c. 21.5 tonnes, and the De 
Meern 1 with a capacity of c. 15 tonnes (Moeyes 2007; Rieth 2014). Fluvio-maritime ves
sels such as the Comacchio (c. 130 tonne cargo capacity) and Blackfriars’s Ship (c. 55 
tonne cargo capacity) could operate both at sea and on rivers (Bondesan et al. 1990; Mars
den 1967). While this would have allowed vessels with a larger cargo capacity to operate in 
f
luvial environments, their operation was primarily restricted to a river’s lower course and 
estuary due to their size.
On land, a range of transport options were available. Wagons and carts formed the 
most common and could carry large loads, especially if they were pulled by mules or 
oxen. Legislation from the fourth century AD served to limit the load a cart could carry 
to under 500 kg, potentially to avoid damaging or blocking public roads (Codex Theodo
sianus 8.5.30; Edict of Maximum Prices 14.1.8; Adams 2012, 220–21). However, wagons 
with a higher capacity are known to have existed, with many carts likely able to carry 1–2 
tonnes of cargo (Russell 2013). Specialist wagons used to transport extremely heavy loads 
of stone and marble are also known, but these were used in extraordinary circumstances 
(Adams 2007, 199; Russell 2013, 102–03). Finally, if cargo was sufficiently portable, pack 
animals offered another method of transport. Pack animals, such as mules and camels, have 
been estimated to be capable of carrying loads of between 80 and 150 kg (Adams 2007, 
2012; Raepsaet 2009). Although not suitable for all cargoes, a mule could carry goods in 
panniers on either side, so long as the loads were balanced. This might take the form of two 
amphorae, two crates, or two sacks. Pack animals were especially useful if a cargo needed 
to move over arduous terrain, being able to traverse landscapes impassable to wheeled 
traffic.
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 16 of 23
In Table 4, a series of hypothetical ratios based on the cargo capacity of different trans
port types are displayed. These outline the quantities of other transport types needed for 
the onward movement of a maritime vessel’s total cargo. For example, a 150-tonne cargo 
carried by a medium-sized ship would fit into five large river barges, ten medium river 
barges, 100 large wagons and so on. As the intersection of many different modes of trans
port, each with significantly different cargo capacities, transhipment hubs formed bottle
necks in trade networks. For example, even a small maritime cargo of twelve tonnes would 
require approximately twenty-six wagons to move onwards overland. There was pressure 
from officials to load arriving cargo onto waiting vessels to avoid clogging the port and 
ensure the smooth flow of goods. Papyrus P.Oxy. 33.2670 (AD 127) gives an indication of 
the capacity issues that could emerge as goods arrived for transfer. The papyrus lists the 
number of pack animal convoys arriving at a port in the Oxyrhynchus nome each day and 
the quantities of grain they delivered (Adams 2018). Over a nine-day period, the number 
of convoys each day varied between ten and twenty-eight, with the total quantities of grain 
varying between 424 and 1334 artabae. The grain needed to be loaded onto waiting river
craft quickly to avoid creating a backlog. Of course, officials were not always successful. 
The frantic activity described in papyrus SB 14.11,371 (first century AD), where cargo was 
being loaded round-the-clock day and night to clear the harbour, points to the risks of over
loading ports during busy periods (Adams 2018. See also P. Panop.Beatty 2).
With large quantities of goods coming and going, ports needed ample storage where 
cargoes could be placed and formed until they were ready for their onward journey. The 
large quantities of horrea discovered at emporia across the Roman world attest to the need 
to provide sufficient storage capacity for transiting cargo (Van Oyen 2020). The cost and 
duration of time spent in storage are rarely factored into discussions and calculations of 
transhipment, but it could be considerable. Many models only measure active transport 
time; but this can create a misleading image of seamless travel and trade. Cargo might 
sit in a warehouse for a considerable amount of time before its onward journey, waiting 
for transport to be arranged or to arrive. Alternatively, goods may have needed to wait for 
other cargo to join them in order to fill out the capacity of a maritime or fluvial vessel. It 
made little sense for a vessel to sail with an empty or partially empty hold in terms of both 
profit and safety. Where possible, a return cargo would be sourced or efforts made to plug 
gaps in the hold with extra cargo and avoid taking on additional ballast (Rice 2016). This 
Table 4  Estimated ratios of capacity between different transport types from the Roman world. For each 
maritime vessel, the total number of transports of each type required to carry the entirety of the vessel’s 
cargo (rounded up to the nearest whole number) are displayed
Maritime Vessel
River Ves
sel (c. 30 
tonnes)
River Ves
sel (c. 15 
tonnes)
Large Wagon 
(c. 1.5 tonnes)
Small Wagon 
(c. 0.5 tonnes)
Pack Animal 
(c. 0.12 tonnes)
Small Vessel (c. 15 tonnes)
Small Vessel (c. 25 tonnes)
Small Vessel (c. 50 tonnes)
Small Vessel (c. 75 tonnes)
Medium Vessel (c. 150 
tonnes)
1
1
2
3
5
1
2
3
5
10
Large Vessel (c. 400 
tonnes)
14
27
9
17
34
50
100
267
26
50
100
150
300
800
108
209
417
625
1250
3333
Page 17 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
situation is reflected in the discovery of a large assemblage of Gallic Terra Sigillata pottery 
recovered from a warehouse at Port-la-Nautique in Southern France. Consisting of multiple 
deliveries from La Graufesenque, the finewares were stored in the horreum awaiting sale 
to traders operating out of the port (Fiches et al. 1978; Nieto 1986; Sanchez 2009). While 
most finewares in the warehouse were from a single kiln firing, transported to the port as 
a singular consignment, leftover sigillata from previous kiln shipments were also present 
(Dannell and Mees 2013; Van Oyen 2016). Merchants had purchased parts of previous 
f
ineware shipments stored in the horreum, possibly to fill gaps in their hold, leaving unsold 
sigillata in the warehouse until a buyer could be found. It is unknown how long the sigillata 
had remained in the warehouse, but the wide range of potters attested suggest that part of 
the inventory had been in storage for some time (Van Oyen 2016). Of course, where there 
were strict deadlines involved, such as with the state-backed trade in grain, oil, and wine, 
goods might move through transhipment hubs at a greater pace. The impetus to move and 
tranship perishable cargoes with a risk of spoilages such as fresh foodstuffs would also 
have been higher than for objects such as finewares. Ultimately, all remained dependent 
on the myriad variables of ancient transport to align. If carts and ships were delayed by 
weather or mishap, there was little option for cargo but to wait until onward carriage could 
be organised.
Conclusion
Transhipment was an activity that all cargo had to undergo during its journey. The nature 
of Roman transport networks meant many journeys utilised multiple modes of transport, 
necessitating the transfer of cargo at multiple points. Although it is impossible to recon
struct exact figures for the cost and times of transhipment from the ancient world, surviv
ing evidence for these activities reveals the process in its full complexity. Any attempt to 
reconstruct transhipment from the ancient world needs to take into account not just the 
actual transfer of cargo, but the range of other expenses and tasks surrounding it. The cost 
of the physical loading and unloading likely formed a fraction of the expenses incurred by 
transhipment, with fees for port operations and tariffs all contributing to the total cost. In 
the same vein, the transfer of cargo between transport accounts for only part of the time 
goods spent in transhipment. Movement between areas within the port environment and 
inspections could prolong the time cargo spent being transferred. However, it was stor
age time that had the most significant impact on the duration of time a cargo spent in port. 
A transhipment time that on paper might look like days could easily turn into weeks, as 
cargo languished in a warehouse waiting to be purchased or for onwards transport to be 
organised.
Although a range of ancient evidence for transhipment has been explored in this arti
cle, the question remains as to how models of mobility should approach transhipment fig
ures and include them in their analyses? While fixed values for the loading and unloading 
cargo, ones that can be applied uniformly across transhipment hubs, have proved attractive 
in some past models, they form a poor measure of actual transhipment costs and difficult 
to ground in ancient evidence.12 Instead, it may be better to express transhipment expenses 
as a percentage of a journey’s overall cost, rather than a flat rate for cargo. A range of 
12 For example, in Orengo and Livarda (2016; Page 2024).
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 18 of 23
methodologies exist for calculating the price of transport in the Roman era, allowing the 
total cost of a journey between two points to be determined (De Soto 2019; DeLaine 1992; 
Meeks 2015; Orengo and Livarda 2016; Scheidel 2014). Transhipment costs could then 
be calculated based on this figure and added to generate a total price for the journey that 
included the transfer of cargo. Expressing transhipment costs as a percentage of overall 
journey cost overcomes several limitations in the ancient data. Given that the value of coin
age changed significantly over the Roman period, it removes the need to adjust figures to 
account for inflation. It also eliminates the need to equate costs between the different cur
rencies in circulation within the Roman Empire (for example the denarius and drachma). 
Expressing transhipment as a percentage of total journey cost also enables other, variable 
expenses associated with harbour operations to be factored in. Total harbour operations 
might cost, as suggested by the shipping contracts recorded in P.Oxy. 3.522, between 5 and 
10% of the total expenses associated with the journey. However, in some cases this could 
be significantly higher. Different percentages could also be applied to different cargo types 
depending on the difficulty of their transfer. For example, it has been estimated that the 
transhipment of stone in the Medieval period could account for 20–30% of the total cost of 
its transport (Russell 2013). Accounting for different levels of cost would allow a range of 
scenarios to be explored using high and low values, reflecting the differing impact of tran
shipment expenses on trade networks.
In comparison to cost, factoring transhipment time into models of mobility represents a 
simpler task, although not without difficulties. The labour constants outlined in Pegoretti’s 
manual provide a range of figures that can be used to calculate the time taken to transfer 
cargo. Although predominately concerned with the movement of stone and loose material, 
Pegoretti’s labour constants enable different transfer scenarios to be modelled using the 
high and low values provided. These figures are not without flaws, representing an ide
alised scenario for the unloading of cargo by hand that may not reflect the messy reality 
of ancient port activity. However, they can act as a starting point for modellers to make 
educated calculations for cargo transfer time. A further consideration is that labour con
stants only cover the time taken for the physical transfer of cargo. They do not account for 
the duration of other activities during transhipment, activities that likely accounted for the 
majority of the time cargo spent in transfer. Figures for the time that cargo waited on dock
sides, the duration of inspections, and the amount of time cargo spent in storage during 
transfer are highly variable and were probably unique to each shipment. In these cases, it is 
only possible to make an informed estimate of the time these activities added to time spent 
moving through trade hubs.
Although ancient data for transhipment has often proved fragmentary and difficult to 
interpret, these obstacles are not insurmountable. The discussions outlined in this paper 
represent a starting point for the inclusion of transhipment figures in Roman mobility stud
ies and future models of Roman transport. However, more work remains to be done. The 
veracity of the paper’s conclusions and methodologies require exploration and testing, 
which will lead to further refinement of transhipment figures. Agent Based Modelling rep
resents one such avenue of future research, providing a way to test a range of hypotheses by 
simulating different transhipment scenarios (Brughmans 2022; Brughmans and Poblome 
2016; Brughmans et al. 2019; Rubio-Campillo 2022). Further research and the discovery 
of new evidence may also provide ways to incorporate greater nuance into transhipment 
f
igures, accounting for geographic and chronological differences across the Roman world. 
The continuing integration of this crucial process into models of Roman mobility will ena
ble more comprehensive analyses of ancient journeys, allowing transhipment’s full impact 
on Roman transport and trade to be understood.
Page 19 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
Author Contribution J.P. was responsible for writing and preparing the manuscript for submission.
Funding The research in this article was funded by the European Research Executive Agency (REA) under 
Grant Agreement 101154683—OverTheWaters.
Data Availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The author declares they have no financial or proprietary interests in any material dis
cussed in this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDeriva
tives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduc
tion in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do 
not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The 
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
Adams C (2007) Land transport in Roman Egypt a study of economics and administration in a Roman prov
ince. Oxford University Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ acprof: oso/ 97801 99203 970. 001. 0001
Adams C (2012) Transport. In: Scheidel W (ed) The Cambridge companion to the Roman economy. Cam
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 218–240. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ CCO97 81139 030199. 015
Adams C (2018) Nile river transport under the Romans. In: Wilson A, Bowman A (eds) Trade, commerce, 
and the state in the Roman world. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 175–208. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1093/ oso/ 97801 98790 662. 003. 0006
Arnaud P (2007) Diocletian’s prices edict: the prices of seaborne transport and the average duration of mari
time travel. J Roman Archaeol 20:321–336. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S1047 75940 00054 44
Barker S, Russell B (2012) Labour figures for Roman stone-working: pitfalls and potential. Anejos Archivo 
Esp Arqueol 64:83–94
Barker S, Russell B (2023) Beyond labour figures: the ‘hidden’ costs of stoneworking and their application 
in architectural energetics. In: Barker S, Courault C, Domingo JÁ, Maschek D (eds) From concept to 
monument: time and costs of construction in the ancient world papers in honour of janet DeLaine. 
Archaeopress, Oxford, pp 15–42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/ jj. 53292 94.6
Barresi P (2003) Province dell’Asia Minore: costo dei marmi, architettura pubblica e committenza. Rome, 
L’Erma di Bretschneider
Bevan A (2014) Mediterranean containerization. Curr Anthropol 55:387–418. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1086/ 
677034
Bockius R (2000) Antike Prahme. Monumentale Zeugnisse keltischrömischer Binnenschiffahrt aus der Zeit 
vom 2. Jh. v.Chr. bis ins 3. Jh. n.Chr. Jahrb Römisch-German Zentralmus Mainz 47:439–493
Boetto G, Divić A, Zubčić K (2021) A Roman barge from the Kupa River at Kamensko, Croatia: evidence 
of a regional shipbuilding tradition of the Danube River Basin in Southeastern Europe. Archaeonautica 
21:115–121. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4000/ archa eonau tica. 969
Boetto G (2011) Tra il fiume e il mare: le caudicariae di Fiumicino. In: Arnaud F, Harris WV, Ira K (eds) 
Maritime technology in the ancient economy. Ship-design and navigation (Portsmouth, RI, Journal of 
Roman Archaeology Supplementary Series). Portsmouth, Journal of Roman Archaeology
Bondesan M, Dal Cin R, Monari R (1990) L’ambiente in cui si arenò la nave romana di Comacchio: pos
sibili modalità del suo naufragio e seppellimento. In: Berti F (ed) Fortuna maris: la nave romana de 
Comacchio. Nuova Alfa, Bologna, p 13
Brandon CJ, Hohlfelder RL, Jackson MD, Oleson JP, Bottalico L (2014) Building for eternity: the history 
and technology of Roman concrete engineering in the sea. Oxbow Books, Oxford. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
2307/j. ctvh1 dvk5
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 20 of 23
Broekaert W, Zuiderhoek A (2020) Capital goods in the Roman economy. In: Erdkamp P, Verboven K, 
Zuiderhoek A (eds) Capital, investment, and innovation in the Roman world. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp 99–146. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oso/ 97801 98841 845. 003. 0004
Brughmans T (2020) Evaluating the potential of computational modelling for informing debates on Roman 
economic integration. In: Verboven K (ed) Complexity Economics. Building a new approach to ancient 
economic history. Springer, Cham, pp 105–123
Brughmans T (2022) Why simulate Roman economies? In: Brughmans T, Wilson A (eds) Simulating 
Roman economies: theories, methods, and computational models. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 
3–36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oso/ 97801 92857 828. 003. 0001
Brughmans T, Poblome J (2016) Roman bazaar or market economy? Explaining tableware distributions 
through computational modelling. Antiquity 90:393–408. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15184/ aqy. 2016. 35
Brughmans T, Hanson J, Mandich M, Romanowska I, Rubio-Campillo X, Carrignon S, Collins-Elliott S, 
Crawford K, Daems D, Fulminante F, de Haas T, Kelly P, Moreno Escobar M, Paliou E, Prignano L, 
Ritondale M (2019) Formal modelling approaches to complexity science in Roman studies: a mani
festo. Theor Rom Archaeol J 2(1):4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 16995/ traj. 367
Campbell B (2012) Rivers and the power of ancient Rome. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill
Campbell PB (2022) Contingent movement: seafaring, contracts and law. In: Candy P, Ferrándiz EM (eds) 
Roman law and maritime commerce. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, pp 23–40. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1515/ 97814 74478 168- 007
Caré A (2005) L’ornato architettonico della Basilica di Massenzio. Rome, L’Erma di Bretschneider
Carreras C, De Soto P (2010) Historia de la movilidad en la Península Ibérica: Redes de transporte en SIG. 
Editorial de la Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona
Carreras C, De Soto P (2013) The Roman transport network: a precedent for the integration of the European 
mobility. Hist Methods 46:117–133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01615 440. 2013. 803403
Casson L (1965) Harbour and river boats of ancient Rome. J Roman Stud 54:31–39. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 
297428
Chepel E (2023) 45 List of expenses for shipping of wine. In: Hoogendijk FAJ, Vera Stolk J (eds) Greek, 
demotic and Coptic Papyri and Ostraca in the Leiden Papyrological Institute. Leiden, Brill, pp 154
159. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1163/ 97890 04519 596
Dannell GB, Mees A (2013) New approaches to Samian distribution. In: Fulford M, Durham E (eds) Seeing 
red: new economic and social perspectives on Terra Sigillata. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
pp 165–187
De Juan C, Cibecchini F (2021) Initial construction evidence of the Bou Ferrer shipwreck, a large vessel 
of the Early Roman Empire. Archaeonautica 21:153–159. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4000/ archa eonau tica. 1248
De Soto P (2019) Network analysis to model and analyse Roman transport and mobility. In: Verhagen P, 
Joyce J, Groenhuijzen MR (eds) Finding the limits of the limes. Modelling demography, economy and 
transport on the edge of the Roman Empire. Springer, Berlin, pp 271–289
de Weerd MD (1993) Zwammerdam: Romeinse schepen in de noordelijke provincies. Lampas 
26(3):241–257
DeLaine J (2015) The pantheon builders: estimating manpower for construction. In: Wilson Jones M, 
Marder TA (eds) The pantheon: from antiquity to the present. Cambridge University Press, Cam
bridge, pp 160–192. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ CBO97 81139 015974. 007
DeLaine J (2017) Quantifying manpower and the cost of construction in Roman building projects: research 
perspectives. Archeol Archit 22:13–19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1400/ 263403
DeLaine J (1992) Design and construction in Roman imperial architecture: the Baths of Caracalla in Rome. 
Dissertation, University of Adelaide
DeLaine J (1997) The baths of Caracalla: a study in the design, construction, and economics of large-scale 
building projects in imperial Rome. Portsmouth (RI). J Roman Archaeol
De Soto P (2010) Anàlisi de la xarxa de comunicacions i del transport a la Catalunya romana: estudis de 
distribució i mobilitat. Dissertation, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Erim KT, Reynolds J (1970) The copy of Diocletian’s edict on maximum prices from Aphrodisias in Caria. 
J Roman Stud 60:120–141. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 299418
Fentress E, Perkins P (1988) Counting African red slip ware. In: Mastino A (ed) L’Africa Romana: Atti del 
V Convegno di studio Sassari, 11–13 dicembre 1987. Università degli studi di Sassari, Sassari, pp 
205–214
Fiches J-L, Guy M, Poncin L (1978) Un lot de vases sigillés des premières années du règne de Néron dans 
l’un des ports de Narbonne. Archaeonautica 2:185–219
Fournier F, Léonide P, Marié L, Quillévéré F, Margerel J-P, Miholjek I, Dugonjić P, Carre M-B, Cavassa 
L, Morsilli M, Boetto G (2024) Provenance of the ballast stones from the Roman Republican ship 
Page 21 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
Ilovik-Paržine 1: a hypothesis about its place of construction. J Archaeol Sci Rep 57:104580. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jasrep. 2024. 104580
Freu C (2009) Dockers et portefaix du monde romain: réflexions à partir du Code Théodosien 14.22.1 con
cernant le corpus des saccarii du Portus Romanus. In: Aubert J-J, Blanchard P (eds) Droit, religion et 
société dans le Code Théodosien. Université de Neuchâte, Geneva, pp 303–326
Hawkins C (2013) Labour and employment. In: Erdkamp P (ed) The Cambridge companion to ancient 
Rome. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 336–351. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ CCO97 81139 
025973. 024
Hein A, Kilikoglou V (2020) Digital modelling of function and performance of transport amphorae. Int J 
Ceram Eng Sci 2:187–200. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ces2. 10056
Jakab É (2022) Loans and securities: tracing maritime trade in the archive of the Sulpicii. In: Candy P, 
Ferrándiz EM (eds) Roman law and maritime commerce. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, pp 
137–170. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1515/ 97814 74478 168- 012
Keay S (2018) The role played by the Portus Augusti in Flows of commerce between rome and its mediter
ranean ports. In: Woytek B (ed) Infrastructure and distribution in ancient economies. Proceedings of 
a conference held at the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 28–31 October 2014. Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, pp 147–194
Laurence R (1998) Land transport in Roman Italy: costs, practice and the economy. In: Parkins H, Smith C 
(eds) Trade, traders and the ancient city. Routledge, London, pp 129–148
Levinson M (2006) The box: how the shipping container made the world smaller and the world economy 
bigger. Princeton University Press, Princeton. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/j. ctvcs zztg
Livarda A, Orengo HA (2015) Reconstructing the Roman London flavourscape: new insights into the exotic 
food plant trade using network and spatial analyses. J Archaeol Sci 55:244–252. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. jas. 2015. 01. 008
Malmberg S (2015) ‘Ships are seen gliding swiftly along the sacred Tiber’: the river as an artery of urban 
movement and development. In: Östenberg I, Malmberg S, Bjørnebye J (eds) The moving city. Proces
sions, passages and promenades in Ancient Rome. Bloomsbury, pp 187–201
Marlière É (2001) Le tonneau en Gaule romaine. Gallia 58:181–201
Marlière É (2014) Les campagnes militaires et l’expansion de l’usage du tonneau dans l’Empire romain. In: 
Pérard J, Perrot M (eds) Rencontres du Clos-Vougeot 2013—De la cave au vin: Une fructueuse alli
ance. Centre Georges Chevrier, pp 47–61
Marsden P (1967) A ship of the Roman period: from blackfriars, in the City of London. Guildhall Museum, 
London
Martelli E (2013) Sulle spalle dei saccarii: le rappresentazioni di facchini e il trasporto di derrate nel porto 
di Ostia in epoca imperiale. Archaeopress, Oxford. https:// doi. org/ 10. 30861/ 97814 07310 787
Marzano A (2022) The personal infrastructure of maritime trade. In: Candy P, Ferrándiz EM (eds) Roman 
law and maritime commerce. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, pp 57–76. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1515/ 97814 74478 168- 009
McCormick M (2012) Movements and markets in the first millennium. information, containers, and ship
wrecks. In: Morrison C (ed) Trade and markets in Byzantium. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C., 
pp 51–98
McGrail S (1989) The shipment of traded goods and of ballast in antiquity. Oxf J Archaeol 8:353–358. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1468- 0092. 1989. tb002 10.x
Mclean A, Rubio-Campillo X (2022) Beyond least cost paths: circuit theory, maritime mobility and patterns 
of urbanism in the Roman Adriatic. J Archaeol Sci 138:105534. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jas. 2021. 
105534
Meeks E (2015) The design and implementation of ORBIS: the Stanford geospatial network model of the 
Roman world. Bull Assoc Inf Sci Technol 41:17–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ bult. 2015. 17204 10206
Moeyes G (2007) Laadvermogen en vaareigenschappen van De Meern 1. In Jansma E and Morel JMAW 
(eds.) Een Romeinse Rijnaak, gevonden in Utrecht-De Meern. Resultaten van het onderzoek naar de 
platbodem ‘De Meern 1’ (Rapportage Archeologische Monumentenzorg 144). Rijksdienst voor Arche
ologie, Cultuurlandschap en Monumenten, Amersfoort, pp 151–174
Munar Llabrés S, Cardell J, De Juan C, Cau MÁ, Bernal-Casasola D, Picornell L, García Riaza E (2022) 
Ses Fontanelles shipwreck (Mallorca, Balearic Islands): an exceptional late Roman vessel and its 
cargo. J Marit Archaeol 17:487–505. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11457- 022- 09331-6
Nieto FJ (1986) El pecio Culip IV. Observaciones sobre la organización de los talleres de terra sigillata de la 
Graufesenque. Archaeonautica 6:81–115
Orengo HA, Livarda A (2016) The seeds of commerce: a network analysis-based approach to the Romano
British transport system. J Archaeol Sci 66:21–35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jas. 2015. 12. 003
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3 
    3  
Page 22 of 23
Page J (2024) Rivers vs. Roads? A route network model of transport infrastructure in Northern Italy during 
the Roman period. In: CAA 2023 proceedings. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5281/ zenodo. 10593 574
Parker AJ (1992a) Ancient shipwrecks of the mediterranean & the Roman provinces. Archaeopress, Oxford
Parker AJ (1992b) Cargoes, containers and stowage: the ancient Mediterranean. Int J Naut Archaeol 21:89
100. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1095- 9270. 1992. tb003 51.x
Pegoretti G (1869) Manuale practico per l’estimazione dei lavori architettonici stradali, idraulici e di fortifi
cazione per uso degli ingegneri ed architetti, Milan
Previato C (2023) The amphitheatres of Regio X –Venetia et Histria: the impact of stone supplying cost on 
ancient construction processes. In: Barker S, Courault C, Domingo JÁ, Maschek D (eds) From concept 
to monument: time and costs of construction in the ancient world papers in honour of Janet DeLaine. 
Archaeopress, Oxford, pp 356–371. https:// doi. org/ 10. 32028/ 97817 89694 222
Purpura G (2022) Roman documentation concerning shipping in bulk. In: Candy P, Ferrándiz EM (eds) 
Roman law and maritime commerce. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, pp 109–136. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1515/ 97814 74478 168- 011
Raepsaet G (2009) Land transport, part 2: riding, harnesses, and vehicles. In: Oleson JP (ed) The Oxford 
handbook of engineering and technology in the classical world. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 
580–605. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oxfor dhb/ 97801 99734 856. 013. 0024
Rice C (2016) Shipwreck cargoes in the western Mediterranean and the organization of Roman maritime 
trade. J Roman Archaeol 29:165–192. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S1047 75940 00720 93
Rickman GE (1988) The archaeology and history of Roman ports. Int J Naut Archaeol 17:257–267. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1095- 9270. 1988. tb006 52.x
Rickman GE (1998) Problems of transport and storage of goods for distribution: “Les traces oubliées” 
La mémoire perdue Recherches sur l’administration romaine. L’École française de Rome, Rome, pp 
317–324
Rieth É (2014) Le chaland Arles-Rhône 3 dans la batellerie gallo-romaine: étude typologique et interpréta
tion historique. Archaeonautica 18:279–287
Rohde D (2020) Roman port societies and their collegia: differences and similarities between the associa
tions of Ostia and Ephesos. In: Arnaud P, Keay S (eds) Roman port societies: the evidence of inscrip
tions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 107–131. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97811 08665 278. 
005
Rougé J (1957) Ad ciconias nixas. Rev Etud Anc 59:320–328
Roughier H (2020) Port occupations and social hierarchies: a comparative study through inscriptions from 
Hispalis, Arelate, Lugdunum, Narbo Martius, Ostia-Portus and Aquileia. In: Arnaud P, Keay S (eds) 
Roman port societies: the evidence of inscriptions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 132
151. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97811 08665 278. 006
Rubio-Campillo X, Coto-Sarmiento M (2022) New approaches to old questions: the exploration of large
scale trade dynamics using hypothesis-testing frameworks. In: Brughmans T, Wilson A (eds) Simu
lating Roman economies: theories, methods, and computational models. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp 167–195. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oso/ 97801 92857 828. 003. 0006
Russell B (2013) The economics of the Roman stone trade. Oxford University Press, Oxford. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1093/ acprof: oso/ 97801 99656 394. 001. 0001
Russell B (2018) “Difficult and costly”: Stone transport, its constraints, and its impact. In: Coquelet C, 
Creemers G, Dreesen R, Goemare É (eds) Roman Ornamental Stones in North-Western Europe. 
AWaP, Namur, pp 131–150
Sanchez C (2009) Narbonne à l’époque tardo-républicaine. Chronologies, commerce et artisanat céramique. 
Montpellier, Revue Archéologique de Narbonnaise
Scheidel W (2010) Real wages in early economies: evidence for living standards from 1800 BCE to 1300 
CE. J Econ Soc Hist Orient 53:425–462
Scheidel W (2014) The shape of the Roman world: modelling imperial connectivity. J Roman Archaeol 
27:7–32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S1047 75941 40011 47
Sijpesteijn PJ, Worp KA, Gagos T, Verhooght AMFW (2011) A transportation archive from fourth-century 
Oxyrhynchus: (P. Mich. American Society of Papyrologists, Durham
Tchernia A, Pompey P, Hesnard A (1978) L’epave romaine de la Madrague de Giens (Var) (Campagnes 
1972–1975). Editions du Centre National de la Rescherche Scientifique, Paris
Tran N (2020) Boatmen and their Corpora in the great ports of the Roman west (second to third centuries 
AD). In: Arnaud P, Keay S (eds) Roman port societies: the evidence of inscriptions. Cambridge Uni
versity Press, Cambridge, pp 85–106. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97811 08665 278. 004
Van Oyen A (2016) How things make history: the Roman empire and its terra sigillata pottery. Amsterdam 
University Press, Amsterdam. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5117/ 97894 62980 549
Page 23 of 23 
Journal of Maritime Archaeology            (2026) 21:3  
    3 
Van Oyen A (2020) The socio-economics of Roman storage. Agriculture, trade, and family. Cambridge Uni
versity Press, Cambridge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97811 08850 216
Vera D (2006) Un’iscrizione sulle distribuzioni pubbliche di vino a Roma (CIL VI 1785=31931). In: Silves
trini M, Spagnuolo Vigorita T, Volpe G (eds) Studi in onore di Francesco Grelle. Bari, Edipuglia, pp 
303–317
Virlouvet C (2020) Warehouse societies. In: Arnaud P, Keay S (eds) Roman port societies: the evidence 
of inscriptions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 152–177. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97811 
08665 278. 007
Wilson A (2011a) Developments in Mediterranean shipping and maritime trade from the Hellenistic period 
to AD 1000. In: Robinson D, Wilson A (eds) Maritime archaeology and ancient trade in the mediter
ranean. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 33–59
Wilson A (2011b) The economic influence of developments in maritime technology in antiquity. In: Harris 
WV, Iara K (eds) maritime technology in the ancient economy: ship design and navigation. JRA sup
plementary series 84, journal of Roman archaeology. Portsmouth, Rhode Island, pp 211–233
Wilson A (2022) Positioning computational modelling in Roman studies. In: Brughmans T, Wilson A (eds) 
Simulating Roman economies: theories, methods, and computational models. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp 308–324. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oso/ 97801 92857 828. 003. 0012
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.