Internal and Emergency Medicine 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-026-04264-7
LETTER TO THE EDITOR
Delay in inpatient admission at an Emergency Department in a private 
hospital in Beirut
Karaali Mohamad1 · Nakhle Ramzi2 · Tanios Alain2 · Ghosn Charbel2 · Helou Mariana2 
Received: 29 August 2025 / Accepted: 8 January 2026 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Società Italiana di Medicina Interna (SIMI) 2026
Dear Editor,
Emergency Departments (EDs) overcrowding is a prevalent 
issue globally and has garnered significant attention in recent 
times. Patient boarding is a major factor that contributes 
to ED overcrowding. Boarding is precisely defined as the 
time elapsed from the decision of disposition (i.e., patient 
admission) to the actual moment when the patient is trans
ferred to the destination ward. Boarding has adverse effects 
on patient care, satisfaction levels, morbidity, and mortality 
rates [1]. Boarding presents a dual challenge: on one side, 
it burdens ED staff, who must operate under overwhelming 
patient volumes, making it increasingly difficult to deliver 
high-quality care. On the other side, it reflects broader 
administrative and organizational issues, primarily related 
to hospital bed availability. In an ideal system with unlimited 
capacity, boarding would not be a concern. However, with 
persistent global challenges, both financial and systemic, 
such a scenario is unrealistic [2]. Given these constraints, 
local administrations must recognize the strain on the system 
and work to alleviate it. At the same time, individual pro
viders, hospitals and emergency departments should focus 
on optimizing the process that spans from patient incoming 
* Helou Mariana 
mariana.helou@lau.edu.lb
Karaali Mohamad 
mkaraali61@gmail.com
Nakhle Ramzi 
ramzi.nakhle@lau.edu.lb
Tanios Alain 
alain.tanios@lau.edu.lb
Ghosn Charbel 
charbel.ghosn@lau.edu.lb
1
2
Internal Medicine Department, Lebanese American 
University, Beirut, Lebanon
Emergency Medicine Division, Lebanese American 
University, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon
to discharges and admissions [2]. Limited data exist on the 
time between completion of a patient's workup and their 
transfer to an inpatient bed. This study analyzes ED board
ing over a one-year period to offer recommendations for 
improvement. We conducted a retrospective review of pro
spectively collected data from the Emergency Department 
(ED) of the Lebanese American University Medical Center, 
a private university tertiary level of care hospital in Beirut, 
with an ED of 17 beds and an average daily patient flow of 
39. No monitoring area is available in the ED. Patients stay 
in their assigned bed inside the ED until final disposition. 
The total hospital number of beds is 200, with an occupancy 
rate of 60% as average. Data were gathered for all patients 
who required hospital admission between January 2023 
and December 2023. This study received approval from the 
LAU Institutional Review Board under IRB # LAUMCRH.
MH3.11/Mar/2024. A total of 13,894 patients were admitted 
to the Emergency Department (ED) in the year 2023, out of 
which 3,163 were inpatients, resulting in an admission rate 
of 23%. This rate is similar to another tertiary level of care 
hospital in the country, with an admission rate of 20.2% 
in the year 2019 [3]. The study included 3163 inpatients. 
The total length of stay of inpatients in the ED is on aver
age 7 h. The average time for inpatients to be transferred 
to their room after the patient is ready for admission was 
64 min. The hospital administration has agreed in the trans
fer policy that when the patient is ready for transfer, the 
transfer time of the in-patient to his assigned room should 
be less than 30 min. A total of 20% of inpatients experienced 
delays and were transferred to their assigned room after the 
30-min bundle. The primary delays were observed in the 
intensive care unit and the isolation floor, with delay rates 
of 38% and 31%, respectively. Other floors of the hospital 
showed delays of 19.4% in the Medical Surgical Unit, 18% 
in the Cardiac Critical Unit and Pediatric Unit, and 13.3% 
in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit. The monthly distribu
tion of delayed admissions, both in terms of numbers and 
percentages, is depicted in Fig. 1. A total of 654 patients 
Vol.:(0123456789)
Internal and Emergency Medicine
Fig. 1  Number and percentage of admissions and delays per month
had transfer delays during the year 2023. Medical logistics 
was the most common cause for delay (27.52%), followed 
by overwhelmed unit nurse (18.49%), patient medical condi
tion (11.73%), and room availability (10.19%). Admission 
delays for inpatients were found to have various causes, with 
the percentage varying across hospitals and reaching up to 
67% in some instances. At the LAUMC, the total length of 
stay of inpatients in the ED from admission to an ED bed 
to transfer to a ward is on average 7 h, which is higher than 
in other institutions [4]. The average interval from admis
sion decision to the actual transfer to the inpatient ward was 
found to differ among countries and even among hospitals 
within the same country. A study involving 1360 patients 
across four hospitals in Saudi Arabia revealed a mean time 
of 58 min, which closely aligns with our findings [5]. The 
lack of uniformity across hospitals in measuring the inpa
tients delay presents an additional barrier to their resolu
tion. In our study, the primary delays were observed in the 
intensive care unit and the isolation floor. After the COVID
19 pandemic, new practices were implemented, such as the 
need for infectious disease screening. These practices still 
persist and cause further delays in patient management. 
Another issue was the financial coverage and the associated 
burden of isolation costs. This was seen after the COVID-19 
pandemic with the high cost for isolation rooms and isola
tion procedures. It is reasonable that ICU transfers expe
rience more delay as critical patients require stabilization, 
close monitoring, and completion of all consultations, tests, 
and procedures before transfer; moreover, some may sud
denly deteriorate and need immediate additional care that 
rightly takes priority over the transfer itself. Some patients 
can also destabilize and need additional care before transfer. 
During the one-year observation period, delays increased 
from September to December, when Emergency Department 
attendance is higher and overcrowding, as expected, further 
worsens this scenario. Furthermore, during these months, 
delays are exacerbated by the onset of flu season, as many 
patients with respiratory infections require isolation rooms, 
prolonging the wait for transfer to the isolation floor. The 
most common cause for delay was the medical logistics, 
caused by the treating physicians and consultants to come 
and assess the patient before transfer. Physicians are usually 
doing their medical rounds on the floors or in the operation 
rooms, and patients to be admitted shall wait to be assessed 
by their dedicated treating physician before transfer. Add
ing that only one "single physician" is responsible both for 
admitting new patients and managing those awaiting admis
sion handed over by the previous shift colleagues. Another 
significant factor contributing to delays is the high workload 
of ED nurses, who are responsible for coordinating transfers 
to inpatient wards that require them to hand over patients 
to ward staff, which significantly prolongs boarding times. 
This is also compounded by the 1-h shift change periods 
in the morning and evening, during which ward nurses are 
unavailable to receive new patients. Another common reason 
was the patient deteriorating medical condition, which is an 
Internal and Emergency Medicine 
inevitable cause of delay. Room availability is also a major 
cause of delay, as reported in previous studies.
It is crucial to identify and implement effective solutions 
to mitigate Emergency Department (ED) overcrowding and 
enhance patient care. These solutions encompass both medi
cal and logistic levels.-Fast Track or direct admissions for non-urgent cases pre
senting to the Emergency Department and requiring admis
sion are beneficial in reducing waiting times and alleviat
ing ED congestion. Many patients presenting for elective 
procedures from outpatients go through the ED at LAUMC 
while waiting for bed availability, mainly during night shifts 
and weekends, or when the admitting office is overwhelmed 
with patients. These patients go through the whole process 
of ED admission, assessment and management and waiting 
for a bed. However, a quick assessment for these patients, 
and admitting them directly to their room, can be a solution. 
This approach can lessen the workload on ED nurses, mak
ing them more available for patients awaiting admission and 
indirectly reducing ED boarding.-Instead of waiting residents to come assess their inpa
tients in the ED before transfer, patients handover can be 
done verbally over the phone between physicians and/or 
residents, to avoid further delays.-Early discharge of patients from the hospital. Studies 
have shown that early discharge before noon reduces ED 
boarding by 96% [6, 7]. It can also reduce the length of 
stay of patients admitted. Similarly, Weekend discharge can 
reduce the hospital’s overall length of stay and increase the 
number of available beds.-Increasing nursing staff on specific floors improve 
patient flow. In addition, increasing isolation beds in the 
isolation floor where a majority of patients are admitted 
and where significant delays occur, can help alleviate bot
tlenecks. Implementing targeted interventions is essential for 
optimizing ED operations, enhancing patient outcomes, and 
ensuring a more efficient healthcare environment. Prioritiz
ing these strategies will help hospitals manage patient inflow 
better and address ongoing challenges in healthcare delivery.
Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are 
included in this published article.
References
1. Kenny JF, Chang BC, Hemmert KC (2020) Factors affecting 
emergency department crowding. Emerg Med Clin North Am 
38(3):573–587. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. emc. 2020. 04. 001
2. McMillan JR, Younger MS, DeWine LC (1986) Satisfaction with 
hospital emergency department as a function of patient triage. 
Health Care Manage Rev 11(3):21–27. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 
00004 010- 19860 1130- 00006
3. El Zahran T, Ghandour L, Chami A, Saliba N, Hitti E (2023) 
Comparing emergency department visits 10-year apart at a tertiary 
care center in Lebanon. Medicine (Baltimore) 102(39):e35194
4. Armiani AS, Yustiawan T, Prabawati E (2020) Identifying the 
factors associated with emergency boarding time. J Health Transl 
Med 23:220–225
5. Al Nhdi N, Al Asmari H, Al Thobaity A (2021) Investigating 
indicators of waiting time and length of stay in emergency depart
ments. Open Access Emerg Med 13:311–318. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
2147/ OAEM. S3163 66
6. McKenna P, Heslin SM, Viccellio P, Mallon WK, Hernandez C, 
Morley EJ (2019) Emergency department and hospital crowding: 
causes, consequences, and cures. Clin Exp Emerg Med 6:189
195. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15441/ ceem. 18. 022
7. Powell ES, Khare RK, Venkatesh AK, Van Roo BD, Adams 
JG, Reinhardt G (2012) The relationship between inpatient dis
charge timing and emergency department boarding. J Emerg Med 
42:186–196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jemer med. 2010. 06. 028
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.